

AMGT 130 Introduction to Arts Management 
3 cr
Introduces the historical development of arts management
through a survey of patronage, artist/manager, nonprofit
and commercial management systems. Lectures and
readings will concentrate on the major areas of interest for
marketing and fiscal management of individual and collective
artists.
Prerequisite: None

AMGT 235 Fundamentals of Arts Organizations 
3 cr
Explores functional elements of arts organizations with
emphasis on strategic planning and organizations' fit in
the arts ecosystem. An indepth study of arts management
focusing on topics including planning, organizational
identity, environmental analysis, strategy development,
marketing, human resources, financial planning, fundraising
and control systems. Focus will be on the strategic
management process and organizational innovation in the
context of the contemporary arts environment. Course
attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 245 Arts Marketing 
3 cr
Examines the fundamentals of marketing theory and its
application in arts management. Topics include marketing
mix; situational analysis; segmentation, branding; the 4
P's, publicity; Internet, social media, and database marketing;
and marketing plan implementation and control. This
course will examine theory and then directly apply concepts
in the development of personal branding tools and in
the generation of comprehensive marketing for a local arts
organization.
Prerequisite: AMGT 235

AMGT 255 Financial Management in the Arts 
3 cr
Explores and examines the major elements of financial
accounting in a typical arts organization. With a focus
on non-profit finance, students will learn to perform basic
accounting tasks, prepare and analyze financial statements,
implement an effective financial control system, use
financial information as part of organizational decision
making, develop a mission-driven budget, and understand
professional accounting standards.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 305 Writing in the Arts 
3 cr
Prepares students for writing in the arts for a variety of
contexts and audiences. The class will be run in a studio
format where students experience and engage in writing,
analyzing, and drafting processes exploring a range of
methods of communicating effectively and disseminating
information about the arts and about their role in the arts.
Students will develop a portfolio of writing (philosophy
statement, bio, resume, cover letter, press release, blog
entries, reviews, interviews, etc.)
Prerequisite: AMGT 130 or instructor permission

AMGT 330 Grants & Fund Raising 
3 cr
Introduces the techniques in grant research and technical
and contextual writing skills for grants in the arts. Examines
government and private sources of art funding and
fund raising techniques for arts organizations.
Prerequisite: AMGT 235

AMGT 335 Museum Studies 
3 cr
Explores the operation of the art museum as a means to
introduce the student to various aspects of the museum
profession. Field trips to area museums and experience
with the research and mounting of a didactic display highlight
the study.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130 or ART 117

AMGT 340 Performing Arts Management 
3 cr
Examines issues particular to the management of performance
artists. Focuses on contracts, legal issues, union
representation, artistic freedom, promotion and marketing.
Emphasis will be placed on problem-solving and
negotiation with the individual artist.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 345 Community Arts and Education 
3 cr
Explores the work of artist educators in and out-of-school
contexts, develop skills to identify learning objectives for
their work, document educational work, and increase the
potency of marketing and descriptive material.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 375 Arts Leadership 
3 cr
Studies the theories of human motivation and leadership
and adaptation of these theories to programs in arts
organizations. Students will probe concepts of authority
and delegation and analyze leadership styles. Students will
also explore concepts of and develop skills in managing
effective workteams, time management, hiring and supervision,
and board relations.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 430 Topics in Arts Management 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of arts management
designed to provide advanced work in arts management
analysis, communication, legal issues and marketing.
Primarily for arts management students in the junior and
senior year. Content identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: AMGT 130

AMGT 435 Advanced Museum Studies 
3 cr
An advanced level of museum study which includes management
and exhibition.
Prerequisite: AMGT 335

ANTH 130 Introduction to Sociocultural Anthropology 
3 cr
Introduces students to the basic concepts, theories and
methodologies of sociocultural anthropology. Creates
an awareness of the wide spectrum of cultural variation
throughout the world. Demonstrates that through the
study of anthropology, we may not only gain an understanding
of "exotic" cultures but also of our own sociocultural
experience. Course attributes: CRCU, CSS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

ANTH 140 Peoples of the World 
3 cr
Examines the way of life of selected societies in various
parts of the world. Explores patterns in human cultures,
as well as the uniqueness of particular societies. Considers
whether or not it is possible to truly understand a culture
other than one's own. Course attributes: C&FS, CRCU,
CSS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

ANTH 320 Peoples of the Middle East 
3 cr
Exposes students to a variety of lifestyles in the Middle
East through an examination of ecology, gender, kinship,
stratification, religion and ethnicity. Considers the cultural
perspectives of the powerful and the weak under colonialism
and in post-colonial situations. Addresses "newsworthy"
issues such as oil wealth and labor migration,
"terrorism," fundamentalism and nationalism. Course
attributes: C&FS, CRCU, WMST.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 or instructor approval

ANTH 321 Peoples of the Caribbean 
3 cr
Explores diverse aspects of life and culture in the Caribbean
focusing on the following themes: colonial history of
the Caribbean and the rise of plantation culture, gender
and family life; the economic situation; industry and commerce;
religion and life cycles; education; health care and
access to medical services; democratization and political
activism, such as the rise of Rastafarianism, ethnic identity
and conflict. Course attributes: C&FS, CRCU.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 322 Peoples of China 
3 cr
Compares patterns of life in pre-revolutionary China with
those that have emerged since the Revolution of 1949.
Examines areas targeted for change by socialist leaders
such as patriarchal attitudes and structures, distribution
of wealth and availability of health care. Evaluates trends
toward rapid industrialization and "democratization."
Course attributes: C&FS, CRCU.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 or instructor approval

ANTH 323 Peoples of Africa 
3 cr
Focuses on the ethnic, cultural, religious, economic and
political diversity in select regions of Africa, as representative
of the kinds of differences found throughout the continent.
Explores such diversity through a historical framework,
addressing the history of colonial penetration, the
impact it had in various parts of Africa and in the African
diaspora, and the complex interplay between indigenous
cultures and their values with the exigencies of the modern
nation state. Course attributes: C&FS, CRCU.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 324 Native American Peoples 
3 cr
Explores indigenous cultures of North America. Students
will consider technology and social systems, contact
between indigenous and European cultures, migration
issues, pre-Columbian world view and lifeways. Contemporary
issues including sovereignty, land claims, social
issues and cultural autonomy will be examined. Course
attributes: C&FS, CRCU.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 330 Children and Culture 
3 cr
Focuses on a comparative analysis of children's lives in the
U.S. and other cultures. Examines the interplay of culture
and biology in the socialization process. Children will
be viewed at work and at play. Explores significant social
problems affecting children. Course attributes: C&FS,
WMST.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 345 Culture, Health and Illness 
3 cr
Compares medical beliefs and practices in Western and
non-Western societies. Examines cultural beliefs, social
behaviors, and economic and environmental factors that
influence susceptibility to disease. Addresses issues concerning
patient-doctor communication and psychosocial
management of illness.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 346 Disability and Culture 
3 cr
Examines ways cultural meanings of disability and experiences
of people with disabilities vary across cultures and
historical eras. Investigates impact of social institutions,
such as education, family, government, media and medicine,
on the lives of disabled. Explores disability as a site
of cultural creativity, as evidenced by interactive strategies,
performance arts, and life writing, as well as a site of oppression
and exclusion. Compares global disability rights
movements. Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 or SOCI 100

ANTH 355 Politics of Culture 
3 cr
Explores nation-states as social and historical creations.
Examines the forces and factors that produce national,
ethnic, indigenous and popular culture. Investigates
gendered, ethnic and religious dissent, and controversies
concerning diverse cultural claims and transnational
processes. Considers the role of popular culture in shaping
representations of self and others. Examples are drawn
from the U.S., Israel/Palestine, South Africa, Egypt, Tibet,
and more. Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 or instructor approval

ANTH 355H Honors: Politics of Culture 
3 cr
Explores nation-states as social and historical creations.
Examines the forces and factors that produce national,
ethnic, indigenous and popular culture. Investigates
gendered, ethnic and religious dissent, and controversies
concerning diverse culture claims and transnational
process. Considers the role of popular culture in shaping
representations of self and others. Examples are drawn
from the U.S. Israel/Palestine, South Africa, Egypt, Tibet,
and more. Course attributes: HONR, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 or instructor approval

ANTH 365 Gender Roles and Culture 
3 cr
Examines the roles and statuses of women and men in
Western and nonWestern societies, treating gender as a
social construct rather than a biological given. Considers
theories about the bases of sexual inequality and the
relationship between gender and other social hierarchies.
Investigates how cultural notions of gender influence an
individual's religious, political, sexual and familial experiences.
Course attributes: C&FS, SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 370 Culture, Power and Protest 
3 cr
Compares the forms of resistance practiced by oppressed
groups in a variety of societies. Considers the assumptions
that have influenced researchers' assessments of social action.
Emphasizes that numerous cultural practices, ranging
from religious rites to oratory to spirit possession, have
political implications. Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

ANTH 395 Special Topics in Anthropology 
3 cr
A course or seminar for students who have taken a substantial
number of anthropology courses. Such courses or
seminars may explore any of a variety of topics concerning
social anthropology, physical anthropology, archeology,
applied anthropology or linguistics, or courses in theory
and method.
Prerequisite: ANTH 130 or ANTH 140 and additional prereqs to be announced

ANTH 499 Teaching Assistant in Anthropology 
3 cr
Supervised academic class presentation(s), assistance with
study sessions and tutorials, attendance at all classes, final
paper and other duties negotiated with course instructor.
Must have completed a minimum of four (4) courses in
the discipline, have a 3.0 overall GPA or better, and a B+
or better in the course. This course can be taken for either
pass/fail or traditional letter grading. The course requires
approval of the department prior to enrollment.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

ANTH 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth under the direction of
an anthropologist. Requires written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

ANTH 501 Research Assistant
1 to 3 cr
Students will assist faculty member in conducting original
quantitative and/or qualitative research projects. The
responsibilities may include collecting archival, ethnographic,
interview, or focus group data, working with data
sets, or other research activities. This course is repeatable
for a maximum of 
6 credits.
Prerequisite: SOCI 331, junior/senior status, instructor approval

ANTH 540 Anthropology Internship
3 to 15 cr
Placement of advanced students in public or private organizations
which actively apply anthropology, archeology
or ethnohistory as part of their work routine. Internships
may be developed in such areas as interethnic services,
cultural resource management, museum work, local history,
etc. Internships are awarded from
3 to 15 credits per
semester, depending on the extent of student involvement.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, ANTH130 or ANTH140, six semester hours of related courses at 200 level or above, department approva

ART 116 Introduction to Drawing 
3 cr
Introduces art practices through the study and creation
of drawings. Drawing is fundamental to the visual arts.
Working from observation, a mix of methods of line, value,
and form build skills of tone, visual proportion, scale,
sketching, composition, concept and artistic meanings.
Prerequisite: None

ART 117 Great Monuments of Art I 
3 cr
Introduces the history of art through the study of specific
masterworks, which exemplify the art of a particular
period and culture. Sites such as the Vatican and artists
such as Leonardo da Vinci will be examined in order to
understand how art embodies and expresses civilization.
Masterworks in local museums will also be included for
first-hand observation, as will examples from non-western
culture.
Prerequisite: None

ART 118 Introduction to Design 
3 cr
Using a variety of materials, this introductory course
explores design elements, characteristics and concepts
including presentation skills and the role of the craft.
Students develop visual thinking strategies by using line,
shape, form, texture, value, color and space, as well as the
concepts of focal point, unity, variety, movement, pattern
and balance.
Prerequisite: None

ART 125 Introduction to Sculpture 
3 cr
Introduce a variety of sculptured methods including manipulation,
addition and subtraction as well as princples of
three-dimensional design.
Prerequisite: None

ART 212 Introduction to Painting 
3 cr
This in-depth studio art laboratory uses painting from
observation to investigate and refine the use of color.
Projects and readings include painting media and their
use, classic and contemporary palette organization, color
mixing and color theory.
Prerequisite: ART 116

ART 216 Intermediate Drawing 
3 cr
Develops intermediate drawing projects by working from
observation and imagination. Techniques focus on line,
modeling and form using intensive sketching processes.
Prerequisite: ART 116

ART 217 Great Monuments of Art II 
3 cr
Introduces contemporary art from the mid 19th century to
the present day, and how the art embodies and expresses
contemporary visual culture. Examples from American,
European and non-Western contemporary art will be
included, as well as examples from local museums for firsthand
interactions.
Prerequisite: ART 117

ART 218 Intermediate Design 
3 cr
Students integrate and extend processes and media that
were introduced in the first semester, with a focus on how
compositional development, conceptual and material process
and independent inquiry form the foundation of the
design process.
Prerequisite: ART 118

ART 221 Introductory Seminar in Art History 
3 cr
Studies art history with a specific focus on artists and
periods. Social, political and economic trends, along with
the period's cultural context, are employed in the understanding
and interpretation of the art. This course cannot
be taken more than once for credit.
Prerequisite: ART 117

ART 232 Intermediate Painting 
3 cr
Continues the exploration of our visual world, with increased
attention to painting materials, color and palette,
composition and metaphor in painting.
Prerequisite: ART 116, ART 212

ART 235 Introductory Studio (Technique) 
3 cr
Study and practice important facets of studio art techniques
and creative methods in a creative arts laboratory
environment. The course includes exercises and art projects
to prepare students as they begin to develop a professional
portfolio of original artworks. Course topics vary
by semester and may include: sculpture, mixed media,
collage, assemblage, cartooning, landscape painting and
other topics. Repeatable if different topic.
Prerequisite: ART 116

ART 305 The Human Figure 
3 cr
Draw and/or paint based on direct observation of the nude
model. The human figure is a central force of symbolism
in European and Amerian fine art. As such students will
interact with artistic anatomy traditions and innovations.
Prerequisite: ART 116

ART 306 The Concrete Poem 
3 cr
Combine words and images in experimental, interdisciplinary
formats such as hypertext, photo collage, muralgraffitti,
sculptural installation and word-based painting
or drawing. After preliminary studies and exercises,
students develop their own visual concrete poems.
Prerequisite: ART 116

ART 311 Topics in Art 
3 cr
Provides advanced work in analysis, interpretation and
research. Offerings: art, history and the American landscape.
Prerequisite: ART 117

ART 312 Form and Composition 
3 cr
Develops compositional approaches to the making and
understanding of visual artworks through the use of historical
and contemporary art methods and concepts.
Prerequisite: ART 212

ART 315 Intermediate Art Lab 
3 cr
Focus on the creation of a series of artworks around a
common theme, technique or art medium. This is an intermediate
studio art laboratory course. This course may
be repeated.
Prerequisite: ART 116, ART 212

ART 321 Intermediate Seminar in Art History 
3 cr
Covers specific areas of art history in order to supplement
the more comprehensive introductory level studies of art.
Students gain an in-depth experience with one medium
or period. Offerings: Prehistoric to Early Renaissance Art;
History of 19th and 20th Century Art; History of American
Watercolor Painting; History of American Poster
Graphics; The Prendergasts and the "Eight"; Homer, Eakins,
and Sargent; Art and the Italian Landscape; The Lure
of Italy, 19th Century Artists and the Italian Experience.
Prerequisite: ART 117

ART 335 Intermediate Studio (Technique) 
3 cr
Employs mid-level studio art techinques to create original
artworks. Method and technique vary by semester and
may include art forms such as cast painting, block printing,
digital photography, book arts, sculpture or other
specialty topics. Course may be repeated.
Prerequisite: Any 100 or 200 level ART course

ART 412 Advanced Art Lab 
3 cr
Advanced, experimental studio art laboratory. Course
work includes analysis and creation of symbolic/metaphoric
systems, conceptual methods and decision-making
in aesthetics as related to individualized art projects
designed by the student with frequent feedback from the
instructor, peer groups and/or guest artists. This course
may be repeated.
Prerequisite: ART 315

ART 413 Advanced Seminar in Art History 
3 cr
Studies art history with a more specific focus on artists
and periods. Social and political theory is employed in the
understanding and interpretation of art. Offerings: Art
and Society 1870-1914; French Impressionist Era; Art and
the Art Museum; Art of the Italian Renaissance.
Prerequisite: ART 117

ART 435 Advanced Studio (Technique) 
3 cr
Employs advanced studio art techniques to create original
artworks. Method and technique vary by semester
and may include art forms such as portraiture, engraving,
manipulated photography, book arts, sculpture, or other
advanced specialty topics. Course may be repeated.
Prerequisite: Any 200 or 300 level ART course

ART 480 Senior Art Project 
3 cr
Develop a public exhibition of art created in the art studios.
Under the supervision of FPA faculty, students will
select work from their art portfolios, organize and present
a professional display in an art gallery or other appropriate
community venue.
Prerequisite: ART 312

ART 510 Studio Art Teaching Assistantship 
3 cr
Learn the fundamentals of art lab management and studio
art teaching. Course content covers federal and state
regulations regarding art media and their use, various
philosophies of art education, and practical applications in
the college classroom. With faculty guidance, advanced
students gain a preliminary teaching experience.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

ATTR 100 Observation in Athletic Training I 
1 cr
Introduces the field of athletic training. Includes completion
of hands-on proficiency skills related to the field of
athletic training, outlined by the NATA Education Council.
This course will be graded on a pass/fail basis. Coreq: ATTR 220
Prerequisite: None

ATTR 101 Observation in Athletic Training II 
1 cr
Explores further the introduction to the field of athletic
training. Includes completion of hands-on proficiency
skills related to the field of athletic training, outlined by
the NATA Education Council. This course will be graded
on a pass/fail basis. Coreq: ATTR 221
Prerequisite: None

ATTR 200 Practicum in Athletic Training I 
1 cr
Builds on course content acquired by the sophomore year
of the athletic training program. Provides clinical experience
in the field of athletic training. A presentation,
practice and outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills
outlined by the NATA Education Council is required. Experience
will come from various sports and settings. This
course will be graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR major Coreq: ATTR 321

ATTR 201 Practicum in Athletic Training II 
1 cr
Expands upon course content acquired by the sophomore
year of the athletic training program. Provides clinical
experience in the field of athletic training. A presentation,
practice and outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills
outlined by the NATA Education Council is required. Experience
will come from various sports and settings. This
course will be graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR major Coreq: ATTR 322

ATTR 220 Introduction to Athletic Training I 
3 cr
Introduces students to the field of athletic training and
sports medicine. Explores fundamental principles of athletic
training, which includes terminology, physical conditioning
and injury prevention. Coreq: ATTR 100
Prerequisite: None

ATTR 221 Introduction to Athletic Training II 
3 cr
Explores further the introduction to the field of athletic
training and sports medicine. Emergency procedures
and health care administration in athletic training will be
emphasized.
Prerequisite: ATTR 220 Coreq: ATTR 101

ATTR 300 Practicum in Athletic Training III 
1 cr
Builds on course content acquired by the junior year of the
athletic training program. Provides clinical experience in
the field of athletic training. A presentation, practice and
outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills outlined by
the NATA Education Council is required. Experience will
come from various sports and settings. This course will be
graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR major Coreq: ATTR 337

ATTR 301 Practicum in Athletic Training IV 
1 cr
Expands upon course content acquired by the junior year
of the athletic training program. Provides clinical experience
in the field of athletic training. A presentation,
practice and outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills
outlined by the NATA Education Council is required. Experience
will come from various sports and settings. This
course will be graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR major Coreq: ATTR 338

ATTR 321 Lower Body Assessment 
4 cr
Explores all aspects of injury evaluation. Injuries to the
lower extremity and lumbar spine will be stressed through
lecture and lab.
Prerequisite: ATTR major

ATTR 322 Upper Body Assessment 
4 cr
Explores all aspects of injury evaluation. Injuries to the
upper extremity, head and cervical spine will be stressed
through lecture and lab.
Prerequisite: ATTR major

ATTR 337 Modalities in Athletic Training 
4 cr
Explores neurophysiology and human physiology. Students
will learn how these systems are affected when
microfailure has occurred. Students will also learn how to
use therapeutic modalities and develop specific protocols
that will affect the recovery of the microfailure. Required
laboratory.
Prerequisite: ATTR major

ATTR 338 Therapeutic Exercise 
3 cr
Studies the techniques and principles involved in rehabilitation
of athletic injuries. Topics included are therapeutic
and reconditioning exercise, weight training/conditioning,
psychological and physiological considerations and proper
program construction.
Prerequisite: ATTR major

ATTR 340 Athletic Training Management 
3 cr
Explores management issues related to the field of athletic
traning and sports. Topics include but are not limited
to health care administration, professional development,
ethics, budgeting, legal concerns, drug testing and bloodborne
pathogens. This course also prepares the athletic
training student for the NATA exam, employment and/or
graduate school. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

ATTR 400 Practicum in Athletic Training V 
1 cr
Builds on course content acquired by the senior year of the
athletic training program. Provides clinical experience in
the field of athletic training. A presentation, practice and
outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills outlined by
the NATA Education Council is required. Experience will
come from various sports and settings. The course will be
graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR major Coreq: ATTR 450

ATTR 401 Practicum in Athletic Training VI 
1 cr
Expands upon course content acquired by the senior year
of the athletic training program. Provides clinical experience
in the field of athletic training. A presentation,
practice and outcomes testing of clinical proficiency skills
outlined by the NATA Education Council is required. Experience
will come from various sports and settings. This
course will be graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: ATTR 200, ATTR 201, ATTR 300, ATTR 301, ATTR 400

ATTR 450 General Medicine in Athletic Training 
1 cr
Explores all aspects of non-orthopedic injuries and disorders
of the physically active including history taking,
evaluation and instrument use. Exposes the Athletic
Training student to non-orthopedic injuries and disorders
associated with the physically active.
Prerequisite: BIOL 342, BIOL 343

BADM 100 Explorations in Business 
3 cr
Introduces students to the basic functions of business and
management through examination of contemporary issues
in businesses and organizations. Topics include management
of human and financial resources, production and
marketing of goods and services, and legal and ethical
issues in decision-making. Provides students with basic
competencies in business communications and research
methods, and illustrates both successful/unsuccessful
decision-making. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: Open to all except junior/senior Business Administration majors

BADM 201 Business Law I 
3 cr
Develops an in-depth understanding of the American Law
Institute's Second Restatement of Contracts and the Second
Restatement of Agency and relevant provisions of the
Uniform Commercial Code.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

BADM 206 Math Methods in Business and Economics 
3 cr
Studies the fundamental methods of mathematics applied
in business, economics and finance. Familiarizes students
with basic Business and Economics principles of optimization
and marginal analysis. Topics include linear, polynomial,
exponential and logarithmic functions, graphs, limits,
and basic concepts of differentiation and applications
of derivative. This course will be waived if the student has
previously completed MATH 220 Calculus I.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier I Quantitative Reasoning

BADM 210 Information Technology for Business 
3 cr
Explores the application of technology to business communications
and decision-making. Students will utilize
word-processing, spreadsheets, databases, statistical
analysis software, Internet tools, graphics and presentation
software to find, retrieve, organize and present business
information. Emphasizes the importance of technology
(including ethics and etiquette) in facilitating efficient
business communication.
Prerequisite: CCCL 100

BADM 224 Financial Accounting 
3 cr
Introduces basic principles and methods used to develop
financial statements. Introduces ethical issues in accounting.
The course focuses on the key concepts involved in
understanding how business events affect the financial
statements, without going into double-entry recordkeeping.
Spreadsheet and word processing software are used
in the analysis of financial information.
Prerequisite: CCCL100

BADM 225 Managerial Accounting 
3 cr
Introduces basic cost principles and methods used to
determine, plan and control costs. The course focuses
on developing and using relevant managerial accounting
information to make business decisions. Spreadsheets
and word-processing software are used in the analysis of
managerial accounting information.
Prerequisite: CCCL 100

BADM 240 Issues in Event and Sport Management 
3 cr
Provides students with an overview of the basic issues in
managing events in business, culture and tourist venues,
and sport and fitness industries. Covers all aspects of event
management, including feasibility studies, operational
planning and marketing evaluation. Industries examined
include professional, collegiate and amateur levels of sport
organizations; cultural and tourism venues, as well as all
business organizations planning conferences, trade shows,
and other events.
Prerequisite: None

BADM 242 Legal & Social Environment of Business
3 cr
Introduces government regulation of individuals and businesses.
The Constitution, statutes and adjudicated cases
will be used extensively to illustrate the history, philosophy,
structure, processes and controls of state and federal
regulatory systems over economic, social and individual
activities.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

BADM 260 Management 
3 cr
Explores the historical development and concepts of
modern management theory. Blends behavioral theories of
management and social responsibility and presents applications
in a variety of organizational settings. Examines
the role of managers in today's organization and in society
and studies the complex multicultural, global organization
of today. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

BADM 270 Marketing 
3 cr
Examines the role of marketing in today's organizations
and in society and studies the complex multicultural,
global organization of today. Examines basic theory
and terminology with emphasis on the major marketing
components: product, price, promotion and distribution.
Uses multiple research sources, including the Internet, to
explore the marketing practices of today's organizations
and learn real world applications of marketing theory.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

BADM 290 Sophomore Special Topics 
3 cr
Introduces students to various topics of emerging importance
in the fields of marketing, management, finance,
accounting, and e-commerce. Examines current issues in
one or more of these areas.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

BADM 300 Personal Investing 
3 cr
Provides an introductory but comprehensive study of
the major aspects of personal investing. Topics covered
include investment goals and strategies, risk/return assessment,
individual stock investing - fundamental and technical
analysis, bonds, stock mutual funds (various types/
objectives), global investing, money market mutual funds,
the New York Stock Exchange/financial markets and institutions,
accessing investment information and analysis on
the Internet, online investing. No prior business courses
are required or necessary.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 303 Business Law II 
3 cr
Continues the study of business law focusing on sales
transactions and their connection with the Uniform Commerical
Code. Legal aspects of secured transactions, commercial
paper, bailments and carriers are also studied.
Prerequisite: BADM 201

BADM 310 Advanced Information Technology for Business 
3 cr
Provides an in-depth study of the business information
technology application. Students will learn to use the
advanced functions found in word processing, spreadsheet,
and database applications found within the business
environment.
Prerequisite: BADM 210

BADM 320 Accounting Systems 
3 cr
Studies how accounting information is recorded and summarized
using double-entry recordkeeping, first manually
and then using a commercial accounting software package.
Students will be introduced to the design, operation
and management of computerized accounting information
systems, and will develop an understanding of how accounting
systems serve the other management informational
needs of a business.
Prerequisite: BADM 224

BADM 321 Financial Reporting I 
3 cr
Studies the measurement and disclosure issues in accounting
for assets in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP). Studies the theoretical,
practical and ethical issues involving alternative GAAP.
Students use general ledger software in the analysis of accounting
information and preparation of financial statements.
Prerequisite: BADM 320

BADM 322 Financial Reporting II 
3 cr
Continues the study of measurement and disclosure issues
in accounting for liabilities and equity in accordance with
GAAP. Further studies the theoretical, practical, and
ethical issues involving alternative GAAP, as well as the
income statement and the statement of cash flows. Students
use computer software in the analysis/presentation
of financial reporting issues.
Prerequisite: BADM 321

BADM 330 Cost Accounting 
3 cr
Focuses on the development of cost information needed by
managers to plan and control in manufacturing, merchandising,
and service enterprises. Topics build on material
introduced in managerial accounting and include: job and
process costing, standard costing, cost allocations, inventory
management, transfer pricing and performance measurement.
Spreadsheet and general ledger software will be
used in the analysis of cost accounting information.
Prerequisite: BADM 225

BADM 335 Federal Taxation - Individuals 
3 cr
Studies federal income tax laws for individuals, with a
broad overview of Massachusetts income tax laws for individuals.
Students use commercial tax preparation software
to enhance their ability to interpret and apply income
tax law as it applies to individuals.
Prerequisite: BADM 224

BADM 340 Financial Management 
3 cr
Studies the acquisition and administration of funds in
today's corporation. Topics include shareholder wealth
maximization concepts, the globalization of financial
markets, working capital, risk/return, alternative forms of
short- and long-term funds, financial statements analysis,
mergers and acquisitions.
Prerequisite: BADM 224, ECON 141, junior status

BADM 345 Sport Finance and Economics 
3 cr
Examines the theoretical and practical implications of
economics and finance in sports. Basic theories in finance
and economics are applied to managerial control of
sport organizations. Includes financial analysis, feasibility
studies, and economic impact studies of sport teams
and venues. Examines microeconomic decisions made by
sport consumers, players and managers, owners and venue
governing bodies.
Prerequisite: BADM 240, ECON 142

BADM 350 Global Business and Economic Issues 
3 cr
Analyzes the current global business and economic issues
facing businesses and organizations. Provides interactive
participation of students and faculty from multiple campuses.
Students utilize business and economic theory to
analyze and address critical issues facing multi national
corporations. Topics include various global business and
public policy issues. Students work on inter-campus project
teams via the course website to produce multimedia
analytical reports.
Prerequisite: Junior status; completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

BADM 361 Organizational Behavior 
3 cr
Explores the study of group behavior in various organizational
settings through the study of organizational theories
of structure, culture motivation, communication and
group dynamics. Cases and/or group activities are used to
illustrate the application of theory to actual organizational
scenarios. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 362 Human Resource Management 
3 cr
Examines and analyzes personnel functions of staffing,
developing, compensating and motivating. Specific
techniques within each function are explored in detail.
Emphasizes the legal environment in which the human
resource manager operates.
Prerequisite: BADM 260

BADM 363 Operations Management 
3 cr
Examines today's organizations to gain an understanding
of planning, organizing, and controlling production facilities
in manufacturing and service industries.
Prerequisite: ECON 216, BADM 260

BADM 365 Labor and Labor Law 
3 cr
Provides an understanding of labor laws and their evolution,
unions and their operations, and the nature of the
union-management relationship. Utilizes case decisions to
illustrate the collective bargaining process. Course attributes:
SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier II Human Heritage

BADM 366 Team Facilitation 
3 cr
Develops an understanding of the processes and techniques
of team-building and the interpersonal skills
needed to become an effective facilitator. Students will
engage in self-analysis that identifies their personal skills/
abilities and their areas of strength/weakness. Students
will be assisgned to teams and operate as both a member/
facilitator during the semester. They will learn how to deal
with dysfunctional team members while developing interpersonal
skills, enabling them to identify problems and
work toward solutions. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 367 Small Business Entrepreneurship 
3 cr
Introduces students to various types of small businesses
through discussion, debate, and demonstrations. Provides
them with knowledge and skills necessary to prepare a
viable business plan. Students will be expected to develop
and complete a business plan.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 380 Strategic Marketing 
3 cr
Provides an understanding of how to manage the firm's
marketing program. Marketing communications, strategy,
product policy and overall marketing effectiveness are
explored. Appropriate application of the marketing mix is
covered through practical business applications.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 381 Consumer Behavior 
3 cr
Provides an overview of the internal and external influences
affecting the buying decision. Sociological, psychological,
and economic factors are emphasized. Analyzes
consumer and business decision-making.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 382 Marketing Research 
3 cr
Examines the uses and limitations of marketing research
information in strategic decision-making. Follows the
marketing research process from problem definition
through statistical analysis of data.
Prerequisite: BADM 270, ECON 216

BADM 384 Marketing Communications 
3 cr
Approaches the subject from an integrated marketing
communications perspective. Examines advertising,
publicity, sales promotion, personal selling and the use of
the Internet. Positioning, creativity, media planning and
overall marketing effectiveness are determinants of success
that will help students visualize, create and communicate
a complete project. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 385 Global Marketing 
3 cr
Examines the management of global marketing operations,
emphasizing decision-making and policy formulation.
Analyzes the unique social, legal and political considerations
associated with marketing in different cultures.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 386 Sport Marketing 
3 cr
Examines the socio/cultural and economic impact that
sport marketing has on society, including race and gender
issues. Also examines various promotional activities in
sport marketing - media relations, publicity and public
relations; image advertising; and sponsorships. Examines
principles of organizing and promoting sport events and
activities.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 387 Service and Event Marketing 
3 cr
Provides students with an in-depth analysis of the marketing
functions in the service industries. Explores marketing
of goods and services at the wholesale and retail level,
direct sales marketing, marketing of business and personal
services, marketing of cultural, tourist, sporting and business
events, non-profit marketing, such as the arts and
social services, and the role of marketing on the Internet.
Prerequisite: BADM 270

BADM 390 Managing Workplace Diversity 
3 cr
Examines the roles of women and minorities from the
1600s to the present day to gain an understanding of why
and how those roles have evolved. Integrates the changes
in social, political, and economic conditions and value
systems as they affect the ability of women and minorities
to effectively function in social and work environments.
Course attributes: LDRS, SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 405 Contemporary Business and Organizational Issues 
3 cr
Provides an overview of current issues relating to management
and marketing areas in a variety of organizational
settings. Emphasizes operating, strategic, and ethical
considerations in decision-making within today's dynamic
environment. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: BADM 260, BADM 270

BADM 420 Business Resource Center 
3 cr
Offers students an opportunity to provide consulting services
to area firms.
Prerequisite: Junior status, 2.5 GPA

BADM 421 Advanced Financial Reporting 
3 cr
Explores the theoretical and practical issues involved
in accounting for business combinations, multinational
transactions, partnerships, governmental units and notfor-profit
organizations. Students use computer software
in the analysis/presentation of cases.
Prerequisite: BADM 322

BADM 423 Auditing 
3 cr
Examines the professional standards and ethics of auditing.
Explores the theoretical foundation of standards.
Considers how field work, sampling, computers and management
characteristics impact audit risk assessment. The
moral and ethical responsibilities of the profession permeate
the course. Students use computer software in the
analysis and solution of cases/audit project.
Prerequisite: BADM 322

BADM 435 Federal Taxation - Entities 
3 cr
Studies federal income tax laws for C corporations, S
corporations, partnerships, trusts, and estates and more
complex personal income taxes. Students will prepare entity
tax returns, perform basic tax planning and research
publicly available federal tax information from the Internet.
Prerequisite: BADM 322, BADM 335

BADM 441 Managerial Finance 
3 cr
Examines the relationships among risk, return and value
in a financial context as tools for the analysis of capital
structure and budgeting decisions, and the evaluation of
leasing proposals. Covers the basic theoretical financial
models in detail.
Prerequisite: BADM 340

BADM 475 Seminar in Event and Sport Management 
3 cr
Examines existing policies and development of suggested
policies for the management of events and sport organizations.
Uses case studies and current issues in event and
sport management to develop critical decision-making
capabilities. Serves as a capstone course for the concentration,
integrating knowledge from the major, concentration,
and other undergraduate experiences and its application to
those current issues.
Prerequisite: BADM 240 and either a) BADM 387 & ECON 377 or b) BADM 345 & BADM 386

BADM 490 Special Topics in Business Administration 
3 cr
Studies a specific topic in accounting, marketing, management,
finance, or policy for the purpose of encouraging
advanced work and research in a field of interest. Content
will be identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 500 Independent Study in Business
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to study a topic in
depth. Final reports and frequent conferences with the
advisor are required. Enrollment requires individual application
and department approval.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BADM 510 Seminar in Business Policy 
3 cr
Examines, as a capstone course, a range of topics of current
importance in all functional areas of business. All departmental
foundation courses must be completed before
enrolling in this course.
Prerequisite: Senior status, BADM 340

BADM 540 Internship in Business
1 to 15 cr
Offers eligible students the opportunity for enhanced
educational opportunities by providing actual field experience
in public or private organizations that relate to
their academic and professional interests. Enrollment
requires individual application with faculty sponsorship
and department approval. Students must have completed
24 BADM/ECON credits and 
12 credits at MCLA prior to
application. (
3 credits may be applied to the 12 upper-level
credits required in the general program.)
Prerequisite: Junior status, 2.5 GPA

BADM 550 Accounting Internship
1 to 15 cr
Offers eligible students the opportunity for enhanced
educational opportunities by providing actual field experience
in public or private accounting that relate to their
accounting interests. During the assignment, the student
will complete an individualized learning contract sponsored
and approved by a faculty member from the department.
Only 3 internship credits may be applied to the 30
required accounting credits to sit for the CPA exam.
Prerequisite: BADM 322, junior status, 2.5 GPA

BIOL 100 Concepts in Biology 
4 cr
Provides the non-major knowledge of basic biological concepts.
Concepts in Biology deals with the development of
concepts in the biological science of life. Among the areas
to be studied are evolution, genetics, and developmental
biology: all deal with the fundamental characteristic of
life: its ability to replicate over time. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 101 Biology Seminar for Majors 
1 cr
Introduces students to biology in order to support majors
in their academic work. Explores the diversity of fields
within biology through presentations, reading and writing
activities and interactions with peers and mentors. This
seminar is required for all MCLA biology majors.
Prerequisite: Biology major

BIOL 105 Human Biology 
3 cr
Provides students with the knowledge about the structure
and function of the human body. Students will develop
ability to critically evaluate a large number of issues in
this field, as presented in scientific publications and the
news media. Students will gain a foundation essential for
making knowledgeable decisions regarding quality of life.
Students will be encouraged to share experiences based on
their own culture and gender. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 150 Introduction to Biology 
4 cr
Introduces the student to cell biology, mitosis, meiosis, genetics,
photosynthesis, respiration and cellular organisms.
This course is designed for, but not limited to, students
pursuing a major/minor in science. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 195 Topics in Biology
1 to 4 cr
Provides students with an opportunity to explore different
topics and current issues in biology or related fields within
the Department. This course is designed to focus on special
biological topics or issues at an introductory level.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 235 Botany 
4 cr
Overview of the fundamental principles of plant biology
with emphasis on anatomy, taxonomy, physiology
and evolution of algae, non-vascular and vascular plants,
including major divisions of gymnosperms and angiosperms.
The focus will be on plants of economic, cultural
or ecological significance. Required laboratory. Course
attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150

BIOL 240 Genetics 
4 cr
Examines the major aspects of heredity, with emphasis on
Mendelian principles as well as multiple genes, linkage, sex
chromosomes, chromosome numbers, and biochemical
and population genetics. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL150

BIOL 245 Zoology 
4 cr
Introduces the student to the biology of the invertebrate
and vertebrate animals of the world through evolutionary
and phylogenetic relationships. The course serves as
an introduction to the major phyla. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL150 or equivalent

BIOL 250 Nutrition 
3 cr
Investigates the importance of diet for present and future
good health. Examines the importance of carbohydrates,
fats, proteins, vitamins and minerals, and their interactions.
In addition, the course explores topics such as labelreading,
diets, dietary analysis and other issues of current
interest.
Prerequisite: BIOL100 or BIOL150

BIOL 255 Biodiversity 
4 cr
Focuses on global, regional and local patterns of biological
diversity and the processes that influence these patterns.
Central to discussions of biodiversity pattern and process
will be the relevant scientific principles from ecology,
evolution and conservation biology. The impact of humans
on natural systems and biodiversity loss will also be
discussed. Specific case studies will be used to illustrate
biodiversity loss and proposals to protect and restore biodiversity.
Required laboratory. Course attributes: CSTL.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 295 Topics in Biology
1 to 4 cr
Provides students with an opportunity to explore different
topics and current issues in biology or related fields within
the Department. This course is designed to focus on special
biological topics or issues at a sophomore level.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150 or department approval

BIOL 305 Immunology 
3 cr
Examines the structure and function of antigens, antibodies
and the cellular system of immunity. Additional topics
include a study of the complement system, antibody classification,
and immunological tolerance. The interaction
of all systems will be emphasized.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240

BIOL 307 Pharmacology 
3 cr
Examines the basic principles of pharmacology. Focuses
on prescription and non-prescription drugs, their use,
actions, indications, contraindications, misuse and abuse.
Drugs will be considered on a body system basis with the
appropriate consideration of the application of pharmacological
principles as applied to specific body systems.
Emphasis is on pharmacological applications to athletic
training. Stresses the use of electronic media in both
learning exercises and as a source of drug information.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150, CHEM 150

BIOL 310 Animal Physiology 
4 cr
Explores man and other vertebrates, in regard to the structure
and function of the basic tissue types and the major
organ systems with major emphasis on normal functions
and the interactions of each organ system to insure homeostasis.
Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150

BIOL 316 Functional Human Anatomy 
3 cr
Studies human anatomy as it pertains to human motion,
with respect to anatomical and musculoskeletal fundamentals.
Includes a review of anatomy with emphasis on
the function of joints and muscles as they relate to normal
human movement.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150

BIOL 317 Advanced Genetics 
3 cr
Studies selected topics in the field of genetics. Emphasizes
the genetic mechanism as well as how this enables us to
understand how genetics fits into the growing field of biology
as well as its impact upon society.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240

BIOL 318 Parasitology 
4 cr
Introduces students to the principles of parasitology
and the related health concerns to humans and animals.
Parasites from the following categories will be covered:
protozoa, platyhelminthes, nematoda and arthropoda.
Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 245

BIOL 320 Microbiology 
4 cr
Investigates prokaryotic and viral microbes with emphasis
on both general and clinical applications. Major topics
covered are taxonomy, anatomy, morphology, reproduction
and growth, bacterial control, pathogenicity, genetics
and genetic engineering. Extensive laboratory protocol is
provided. Required laboratory. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240

BIOL 324 Marine Biology 
3 cr
Explores the factors that limit the abundance and distribution
of marine organisms. Topics include the diversity of
habitats, reproductive strategies and the interrelationships
between organisms, as well as the influence of currents,
light, temperature and nutrient supply on the abundance
and distribution of life in the oceans. Course attributes:
ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 235, BIOL 245 or permission of instructor

BIOL 327 Plants and Society 
3 cr
Introduces students to the interactions between people
and plants in cultures throughout the world. Topics to be
discussed include the current and historical use of plants
as food, fiber, fuel and medicine. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 327H Honors: Plants and Society 
3 cr
Introduces students to the interactions between people
and plants in cultures throughout the world. Topics to be
discussed include the curent and historical use of plants
as food, fiber, fuel and medicine. Course attributes: ENVI,
HONR.
Prerequisite: None

BIOL 330 Biology Seminar 
1 cr
Utilizes a format of individual reports and/or group
discussions of current papers, topics, or problems in the
biological sciences. One hour weekly.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior Biology majors

BIOL 331 Animal Behavior 
4 cr
Introduces the topic of animal behavior, exploring the
principles of ecology, evolution, development, and ethology.
The course will examine behavioral adaptation (including
physiological, ecological, and evolutionary aspects)
from individuals to population-level interactions. Topics
include: foraging, anti-predator, and mating strategies:
mechanistic control of behavior, sociality, and aggression.
Laboratory component will focus on observation, communication,
and experimental design.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240

BIOL 340 Developmental Biology 
4 cr
Investigates the development of plants and animals at the
cellular, tissue and organismal level. Topics include gametogenesis,
fertilization, early development, organogenesis
and the control of these processes. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240

BIOL 341 Conservation Biology 
3 cr
Introduces the preservation of biodiversity at all levels:
genetic, population, community, ecosystem and biosphere.
Topics will include population biology, extinction, wildlife
and land-use management, and socioeconomic factors involved
in conservation decision making. Course attributes:
ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150 or ENVI 150 or ENVI 150H

BIOL 342 Anatomy and Physiology I 
4 cr
Explores structure and function of the organ systems of
the human body, with emphasis on the integumentary,
skeletal, muscular, nervous and endocrine systems. The
required laboratory includes histology, gross anatomy and
physiology exercises. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150

BIOL 343 Anatomy and Physiology II 
4 cr
Explores structure and function of the organ systems of
the human body, with emphasis on the respiratory, cardiovascular,
immune, renal and reproductive systems. The
required laboratory includes histology, gross anatomy and
physiology exercises. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150, BIOL 342

BIOL 351 Ornithology 
4 cr
Provides an overview of the fundmental principles of avian
biology with emphasis on ecological and behavioral aspects
of ornithology. Students will learn to identify about
100 regional species by sight and/or sound. A semester
long project will encourage students to investigate and
read the ornithological peer-reviewed scientific literature.
Lab activities will include field trips to practice identifying
birds and collecting avian field data. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150 or ENVI 150 or ENVI 150H or instructor permission

BIOL 360 Biochemistry 
3 cr
Surveys the structure and properties of biologically important
compounds: carbohydrates, proteins, amino acids,
lipids, nucleic acids, and vitamins. Other topics to be
covered include enzyme activity, cellular metabolism and
protein synthesis.
Prerequisite: CHEM 201

BIOL 361 Advanced Biochemistry 
3 cr
Studies the chemical dynamics in living systems. Topics
include enzymes mechanisms, metabolism and its regulation,
and energy production and utilization.
Prerequisite: BIOL 360

BIOL 371 Forest Environment 
4 cr
Provides the student a background and introduction to
the forest ecosystem. The temperate forest of the Northeast
will exemplify the principles discussed. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior status

BIOL 375 Aquatic Ecology 
4 cr
Focuses on the physical, chemical, and biological environment
of freshwater systems, as well as on common methods
used in the study of these systems. Concepts will be
applied to addressing current challenges in conserving
freshwater resources. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150 or ENVI 150H or instructor approval

BIOL 380 Evolution 
3 cr
Examines the history of evolutionary thought and the processes
of organic evolution. Students will present selected
topics to the class. Guest speakers will present the effects
of Darwinian thinking in such disciplines as philosophy,
anthropology, psychology, sociology and religion.
Prerequisite: Junior status and/or department approval

BIOL 390 Biometry 
3 cr
Application-oriented introduction to data analysis in the
context of biology. Students will learn to statistically analyze
and interpret data collected from a variety of biological
experiments.
Prerequisite: Junior status and MATH 150, or MATH 220, or MATH 232

BIOL 395 Special Topics in Biology
1 to 4 cr
A course or seminar for students who have taken a substantial
number of biology courses. This course may
explore any of a variety of topics.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval.

BIOL 410 Biotechniques 
4 cr
Explores major techniques in the fields of biochemistry,
cellular biology and molecular biology. This course is
designed to be completely laboratory based.
Prerequisite: BIOL 240, BIOL 245

BIOL 420 Bioinformatics 
3 cr
Introduces the fundamental algorithms used in bioinformatics
and how these algorithms can be used to solve
biological problems. In this class, the students will learn
how bioinformatics algorithms work, as well as how to
obtain sequence data from scientific databases and analyze
these data using tools available on a high-performance
computer.
Prerequisite: CSCI 243, BIOL 240

BIOL 424 Field Study in Marine Biology 
4 cr
Students will conduct research studies in marine habitats.
Field work will take place in the Bahamas over spring
break. Students will have the opportunity to visit a variety
of habitats, such as sandy intertidal zones, estuaries, mangrove
forests, shallow benthic areas and coral reefs (barrier,
fringing and patch). Students will plan studies, conduct
research at the field station, prepare a research report and
present their findings.
Prerequisite: BIOL 324, instructor approval

BIOL 440 Physiological Aspects of Exercise 
4 cr
Develops an understanding of the phenomena involved in
optimum physiological functioning during work performance,
whether it be in everyday living or athletic participation.
Provides students with an understanding of the
physiological aspects of exercise and its practical applications.
Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: BIOL 150

BIOL 460 Ecology 
4 cr
Investigates community and ecosystem structure and
function, energy transformation, matter cycling, abiotic
factors, food webs, symbiosis and populations. Required
laboratory. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 245

BIOL 480 Cell Biology 
4 cr
Explores the eukaryotic and prokaryotic cell. Examines
the cellular processes of transport phenomena, membrane
metabolism, growth, and reproduction, with detailed coverage
of the ultrastructure and function of cellular organelles.
Laboratory emphasizes development of investigative
techniques and genetic engineering. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

BIOL 484 Biomechanical Analysis of Human Movement 
3 cr
Provides instruction in those competencies essential to
the study of the human body as a machine for the performance
of work. Enables effective understanding and/or
evaluation of motor skills and their effect on the human
structure.
Prerequisite: BIOL 316

BIOL 491 BMC: Clinical Chemistry 
8 cr
Introduces the student to the physiology of the organ system
of the body and the various analytes that interact with
them. Discusses abnormal physiology and relates to various
disease states. Discusses the principles of test methodology.
The student applies this theory to the clinical lab
using current diagnostic techniques and instrumentation
to correlate lab results to disease processes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med Tech Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 492 BMC: Clinical Molecular Biology 
1 cr
Introduces the student to the basic structure and function
of DNA. Discusses the impact of molecular genetics in
medicine and specific methods for analysis. The student
applies this theory in the molecular biology laboratory using
current diagnostic techniques and instrumentation to
correlate lab results with disease.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 493 BMC: Clinical Immunology 
1 cr
Introduces the student to the immune system and the immune
response. Discusses immune detection, immunodeficiency
disorders, autoimmune diseases, hypersensitivity,
and tumor and transplant immunology. Discusses the
antigen-antibody complex and the relationship to current
testing methodology. The student applies this theory in
the clinical lab using current immunologic techniques and
instrumentation to correlate lab results to disease processes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 494 BMC: Clinical Hematology 
8 cr
Introduces students to the study of the hematopoietic system
including the relationship of hematologic diseases to
diagnostic characteristics. Discusses erythrocyte and leukocyte
disorders; cellular morphology, mechanisms and
disorders of hemostasis and fibrinolysis; and principles of
test methodology. The student applies this theory in the
clinical lab using current diagnostic techniques and instrumentation
to correlate lab results to disease processes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 495 BMC: Clinical Urinalysis and Body Fluids
1 cr
Introduces the student to the study of body fluids including
urine, cerebral spinal fluid, synovial fluid, serous fluids,
seminal fluid and miscellaneous other fluids. Discusses
specimen collection and analysis. The student applies
this theory in the clinical lab using current diagnostic
techniques and instrumentation to correlate lab results
with disease processes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 496 BMC: Clinical Microbiology 
8 cr
Introduces the student to the study of bacterial, fungal,
parasitic and viral infections in humans. Discusses
transmission, clinical symptoms, specimen collection and
laboratory methods used to identify suspect organisms.
Discusses prevention, as well as antibiotic therapy. The
student applies this theory in the clinical lab to isolate and
identify pathogens, to provide antibiotic sensitivity information,
and to correlate culture results with disease states.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 497 BMC: Clinical Immunohematology 
5 cr
Introduces the student to the different human blood
groups, blood components, the antibody screening and
identification process, transfusion protocols, blood donor
screening, and state and federal regulations. The student
applies this theory in the clinical lab to process blood and
its components, determine blood product compatibility,
apply appropriate quality control and correlate patient
results to blood disorders.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-BMC Med. Tech. Clinical Lab Experience

BIOL 499 Teaching Assistant in Biology
1 to 3 cr
Provides the opportunity for a student to assist in the
preparation and implementation of a biology course.
Prerequisite: Department approval

BIOL 500 Biology Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

BIOL 510 Biology Independent Research
1 to 3 cr
For biology majors who desire to conduct research on a
specific topic in biology. The research will be under the
direction of the instructor and will require a scholarly
report.
Prerequisite: Department approval

BIOL 540 Biology Internship
1 to 15 cr
Offers the student an opportunity to practice in a professional
situation relevant to the biology major. The student
will work with a faculty sponsor and an off-campus supervisor,
as appropriate.
Prerequisite: Departmentt approval, junior/senior status

BIOL 590 Medical Technology/Cytotechnology Internship 
5 to 16 cr
A specialized internship for this concentration taken during
the fourth year of the program in an accredited hospital
with a medical technology or cytotechnology program.
During the internship students receive clinical laboratory
training.
Prerequisite: Department approval, senior status

CCAP 300 Capstone Seminar: 
3 cr
Challenges students to integrate knowledge from several
disciplines, applying academic learning and critical thinking
skills to modern-day issues. Encourages students
to work with others and become engaged citizens in the
context of today's world. Course attributes: CAP.
Prerequisite: Junior status and completion of all Tier I and Tier II requirements

CCCA 101 Creative Arts: Methods and History 
3 cr
What are the creative arts? How are they made, by whom
and why? What are some major examples of the arts? The
course will attempt to answer these questions through
an interdisciplinary study of the eight arts (pictures,
sculpture, music, theatre, film, dance, architecture and
literature) and their relation to society in the past, in the
present and in the varieties of world civilizations. Course
attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 102 The Art of Madness 
3 cr
Examines myths and realities of madness from the perspective
of the creative arts (e.g., art, literature, film, poetry).
Explores a variety of artistic forms from the viewpoint
of the artist and observer in studying the dimensions of
maladaptive traits and behaviors. Emphasis is on critical
thinking and analysis of the subject matter, the creator and
the artistic medium within which it is portrayed. Course
attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 202 The Good Earth: The Theme of Agrarianism 
3 cr
Studies agrarian themes and their importance by surveying
literature, music, paintings, and photography. Focuses
on artistic perceptions of the earth and human relationships
to it. Explores agrarian traditions, values and beliefs.
Includes a study of agrarian social, political and economic
issues. Course attributes: CCA, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 203 Inventing Modernism 
3 cr
Surveys art works from this dominant twentieth century
philosophy and arts movement by considering how its values
and aesthetic ideals shaped film, painting, communication,
fashion, theatre and architecture. Investigates such
thinkers and artists as Freud, Gropius, Klimt and Schiele.
Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 205 Popular Hollywood Films: 1950s 
3 cr
Uses the basic concepts and insights of the creative arts
to examine the ways which American popular film of the
1950s incorporates ideas and societal reality into its modes
of representation. Explores the relationships between
American films and American popular culture. Course
attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 206 Rumi's Vision 
3 cr
Studies the poetry, life, and times of the great 13th century
Sufi mystic, Jelaluddin Rumi. This is a course for students
who want to expand their horizons and explore a view of
reality that is not based on secular materialism. Because
of excellent modern translations, Rumi is rapidly becoming
one of the most relevant and powerful poets of our
time. Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 207 Children's Literature: A Lively Art 
3 cr
Develops a critical understanding of the verbal and visual
art of children's literature. Reflects major stories of world
art and literature through two centuries of English language
publications. Includes novels, short stories (including
folk tales) and picture books. Readings will be placed
in historical, cultural and literary contexts, with emphasis
on techniques of writing and publishing, as well as pedagogical
philosophies. Course attributes: C&FS, CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCCA 209 Contemporary American Poetry and The Times 
3 cr
Covers American Poetry from the 1950s to the present and
focuses on how American poetry reflected the cultural and
political life in the United States from 1956 into the next
millennium. Areas covered will be; poetry's connection
with the other arts (particularly music and the visual arts),
poetry and politics, poetry and race, and the resurgence of
the oral tradition. Students will compose their own poems
in order to better understand the creative process. Course
attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

CCHH 101 Utopian Visions Fact and Fiction 
3 cr
Involves a study of Utopian visions of the past and present,
both real and imaginary, and connects these visions
to four major American protest movements. Incorporates
sources ranging from the Declaration of Independence to
the songs of Bob Dylan. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

CCHH 210 American Women Regionalist Writers 
3 cr
Studies the texts of mid-to-late 19th century women
regional writers in their historical, political and social
contexts. Students will read extensively in both primary
and secondary texts of the period to heighten their understanding
of how it is that literary history is both shaped
and understood, as well as how these particular women
writers resisted the then mainstream prescription for
an American literary project. Course attributes: CHH,
WMST.
Prerequisite: None

CCHH 220 Popular History and Biography 
3 cr
Examines history in non-fiction prose works intended
for a broad audience of intelligent but not expert readers.
It looks at the kind and value of information in
primary sources, and how secondary sources document
them. Primary sources may include letters, diaries, memoirs,
speeches, still and moving photographs, drawings,
certificates, posters, maps to help distrinquish the different
kinds of information revealed in secondary sources.
Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

CCHH 221 Divine Witness 
3 cr
Explores the history of revelations as a fundamental way
of knowing. Reviews important moments in history when
divine witness played a part in shaping civilizations or
altering the prevailing sense of reality. Features readings
from a variety of texts drawn from many spiritual and
esoteric traditions. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

CCHH 223 The Great Depression 
3 cr
Examines the historical, sociological, philosophical, literary
and other aspects of the great American depression of
the 1930s. Examines the cause and effect of change and
persistence during a time of national crisis. Readings are
first-hand accounts, documentaries, narratives and explanatory
fiction. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 101 Contemporary Issues in Society 
3 cr
Identifies and analyzes significant social issues from one's
own cultural context to gain a broader perspective of contemporary
society. Explores four themes of understanding
ourselves and our social context - people's origins, the
socialization process, difference and inequality, and global
connectedness. Examines these themes through multiple
social science perspectives. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 102 Snapshots of Society 
3 cr
Compares theories about human origins and their place in
the world. Explores the relationship between ourselves as
individuals and the broader society. Examines how social
forces shape our existence as selves of a particular race,
gender and class. Identifies key institutions and investigates
the dynamics of power. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 202 World Regions and the New Global Order 
3 cr
Studies the economic, political, cutural and physical
characteristics of the major regions of the world and the
countries within them; discusses how these regions and
countries relate and interact at the international level.
Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 210 Landscapes of Human Activities 
3 cr
Provides an understanding of the fundamental identifying
traits of a culture; the economic, social, and political
systems and institutions societies erect; the cultural
landscapes they create; and the impacts societies have on
natural systems. Course attributes: CSS, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 260 Schools, the Law and Society 
3 cr
Enables students to explore legislation and judicial decisions
affecting school policies. Covers separation of
church and state, controversial curricula and rights and
responsibilites of students and teachers. Compares America
with other cultures regarding equal access to education.
Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: 100-level Self & Society course

CCSS 264 Mathematics of Fairness and Equity 
3 cr
Stresses the connections between contemporary mathematics
and modern society by identifying important social
problems and conflicts and applying quantitative methods
to solve these problems or resolve conflicts. Utilizes the
notion of "enlightened citizenry," when students acquire
broad knowledge of social problems and are able to apply
quantitative methods to make personal judgements
and decisions, as well as challenge our basic assumptions
regarding a social setting. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 264H Honors: Mathematics of Fairness and Equity 
3 cr
Stresses the connections between contemporary mathematics
and modern society by identifying important social
problems and conflicts and applying quantitative methods
to solve these problems or resolve conflicts. Utilizes the
notion of "enlightened" citizenry," when students acquire
broad knowledge of social problems and are able to apply
quanititative methods to make personal judgements
and decisions, as well as challenge our basic assumptions
regarding a social setting. Course attributes: CSS, HONR.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 268 Culture and the Body 
3 cr
Examines the body as a universal experience, a historical
and cultural creation, and an ethical issue with policy
implications. Explores our understanding of the foundations
of our treatment of the body, the relationship between
socialization and body image, how bodily difference
has been used as a basis for inequality, and the impact of
globalization on the circulation of body images and the
exploitation of bodies. Considers ways in which harmful
practices have been challenged and modified. Course attributes:
CRCU, CSS, SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: None

CCSS 269 Education and Society 
3 cr
Studies the role of education as an institution in our
society, the world and their lives. Through the use of a
wide variety of sources, students will become aware of the
people and the historical events that played a role in the
development of educational practices and issues, and will
be able to compare the myths to the realities of this major
institution. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: 100-level Self & Society course

CCSS 275 Aging and Society 
3 cr
Examines societal aging from historical, psychological,
and sociological perspectives. Analyzes changes in norms,
roles, values and attitudes concerning old people due to
compositional changes in the population. Economic and
ideological factors that influence the development of social
policies will be discussed. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 101 Basic Concepts in Physics and Chemistry 
3 cr
Examines the major developments in physics and chemistry
from a historical context as a foundation for understanding
future development in the sciences. Evaluates
current scientific results in an informed manner. Intended
for non-science majors, course concepts will be applied to
contemporary issues. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 102 A Case Study Approach to Science 
3 cr
Introduces students to the use of the scientific method in
various scientific settings. Using the case study method,
students will cover a diverse range of topics which may
include such topics as: the effects of radiation on biological
systems, cancer and waste water treatment. Course attributes:
CST.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 103 Quarks to Quasars 
3 cr
Develops the student's understanding of the physical
universe, from the smallest constituents of matter to the
most distant, energetic structures known. The student will
come to know how the scientific method guides us as we
seek new knowledge. Conservation laws, the relationship
between energy and matter, the need for mathematics and
the inexorable links between the various branches of science
will be considered. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 105 The Chemistry of CSI 
3 cr
Illustrates the intricate role that chemistry plays in solving
crimes through the introduction and understanding
of basic chemical principles. Forensic techniques such as
fingerprint analysis, fiber identification, drug identification
and DNA profiling will be introduced. Case studies and
"CSI" episodes will be used to explore the scientific foundation
for the examination of physical, chemical and biological
evidence. This course is intended for non-science
majors. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 105H Honors: The Chemistry of CSI 
3 cr
Illustrates the intricate role that chemistry plays in solving
crimes through the introduction and understanding
of basic chemical principles. Forensic techniques such as
fingerprint analysis, fiber identification, drug identification
and DNA profiling will be introduced. Case studies and
"CSI" episodes will be used to explore the scientific foundations
for the examination of physical, chemical, and biological
evidence. This course is intended for non-science
majors. Course attributes: CST, HONR.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 106 The Physics of Superheroes 
3 cr
Examines superheros through the lens of modern physics.
The student will use basic physics principles such as mechanics,
energy, and quantum mechanics to model and explain
the powers and events in literature, which consists of
comic books, sci-fi novels, and fantasy novels. This course
will develop problem solving skills that are useful in a
variety of real world applications. This course assumes no
previous knowledge of physics and will be useful for science
and non-science majors alike. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

CCST 230 Energy and the Environment 
4 cr
Looks at the impact of current energy usage on our environment
from technical, social and political viewpoints.
Investigates the present and projected usage of nonrenewable
fuel sources and how modifications due to alternate
energy techniques will affect current energy policy. Discusses
possible large-scale alternate energy methods.
Investigates the scientific aspects of such topics as global
warming and ozone depletion. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

CHEM 150 Introduction to Chemistry I 
4 cr
Studies chemical principles, theories, laws and their applications.
Topics include electronic and nuclear behavior,
periodicity, stoichiometry, structure and bonding. Teaches
laboratory techniques through the performance of experiments
related to the above topics. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

CHEM 152 Introduction to Chemistry II 
4 cr
Studies chemical principles, theories, laws and their applications.
Topics include oxidation and reduction, kinetics,
thermodynamics, equilibrium and descriptive inorganic
chemistry. Teaches laboratory techniques through the
performance of experiments related to the above topics.
Required laboratory. Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: CHEM 150

CHEM 201 Organic Chemistry I 
4 cr
Studies the structure, properties and synthesis of organic
compound and the mechanisms of their reactions. Topics
include bonding, molecular orbitals, stereochemistry,
resonance, acid-based chemistry, nomenclature, infrared
spectroscopy, confirmational analysis and substitution and
elimination reactions. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: CHEM 152

CHEM 202 Organic Chemistry II 
4 cr
Builds on the concepts introduced in CHEM 201 by studying
the reactivity of other classes of compounds including
aromatic, unsaturated, alcohols, ethers, carbonyl
derivatives and nitrogen-containing compounds. Nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) will be studied. Basic total
synthesis will be covered throughout the semester as new
reactions are introduced. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: CHEM 201

CHEM 250 Inorganic Chemistry 
3 cr
Explores the structures, properties and chemical reactivity
of the elements and of many compounds. This course
builds upon the principles that have been introduced in
general chemistry and will enhance understanding of
atomic structure and bonding models, periodic trends and
molecular symmetry, including molecular orbitals. These
concepts are directly applicable to organic and biochemistry
and environmental science.
Prerequisite: CHEM 152

CHEM 301 Physical Chemistry I 
3 cr
Studies the concepts and methods of classical thermodynamics
and their application to chemical systems including:
chemical reactions, phase changes, solubility, equilibrium,
kinetics and electrochemistry.
Prerequisite: CHEM 152, MATH 320

CHEM 302 Physical Chemistry II 
3 cr
Develops the mathematical and conceptual foundations
of quantum mechanics. Includes applications of quantum
theory to atomic and molecular spectroscopy. Group
theory will be introduced and then applied to atomic and
molecular structure and motion, rotational, vibrational
and electronic spectra.
Prerequisite: CHEM 301 Coreq: CHEM 401

CHEM 310 Analytical Chemistry 
4 cr
Examines classical and modern methods of chemical
analysis. Emphasis is placed on chemical equilibrium,
titrimetry and selected analytical applications of instrumental
methods, including visible, infrared, fluorescence
spectroscopy, gas chromatography and electro-chemistry.
Required laboratory focuses on analytical techniques.
Prerequisite: CHEM 152

CHEM 380 Drug Chemistry 
3 cr
Explores the chemistry of drug design, synthesis and
action. The methods used to design potential new drug
molecules will be discussed as well as how they are either
isolated from natural sources or created in the laboratory.
Prerequisite: CHEM 202, CHEM 250

CHEM 395 Special Topics in Chemistry
1 to 4 cr
Covers current topics in chemistry including: bioinorganic
chemistry, bioorganic chemistry, forensic chemistry and
physical chemistry. Depending on the topic, laboratory
exercises could be conducted as part of the course content.
This course does not require an independent project.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status or department approval

CHEM 401 Advanced Laboratory 
3 cr
Examines bulk macroscopic and microscopic properties of
matter. Topics include computer applications to statistical
methods and data analysis, glass blowing and techniques
of experimental physical chemistry.
Prerequisite: CHEM 301 Coreq: CHEM 302

CHEM 405 Advanced Synthetic Chemistry 
3 cr
Introduces the student to a variety of advanced methods
in the synthesis and characterization of organic and inorganic
compounds. A wide range of compounds will be
synthesized, including organic compounds, bioinorganic
compounds, transition-metal complexes, and coordination
compounds.
Prerequisite: CHEM 202, CHEM 310

CHEM 410 Instrumental Methods in Chemistry 
3 cr
Explores the role of instruments in chemical research. The
theory and hands-on experience of a variety of analytical
instruments will be covered. These include: ultraviolet,
visible, fluorescence and infrared spectroscopic instrumentation
as well as high pressure liquid chromatography
(HPLC) and gas chromatrography (GC). This course is
laboratory-based with minimal lecture.
Prerequisite: CHEM 310

CHEM 420 Special Topics in Chemistry
1 to 4 cr
Covers current topics in chemistry including: bioinorganic
chemistry, bioorganic chemistry, forensic chemistry and
physical chemistry. Depending on the topic, laboratory
exercises could be conducted as part of the course content.
This course requires an independent project.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status or department approval

CHEM 440 Advanced Organic Chemistry 
3 cr
Provides the student with a deeper understanding of some
of the concepts and reactions that are discussed in CHEM
201 and CHEM 202. The course also introduces new reactions
such as the Aldol, Clasien Rearrangement and Ene
reactions. The role of these reactions in the total synthesis
of natural products is also explored. Current topics in
organic chemistry will be discussed.
Prerequisite: CHEM 202

CHEM 490 Chemistry Seminar 
1 cr
Presents current topics in chemistry. Primary literature
articles will be assigned and discussed in class. Enrolled
students will present topics of their choice. Attendance at
academic lectures at other colleges/universities is possible.
Prerequisite: Senior status

CHEM 500 Independent Study in Chemistry
1 to 3 cr
For chemistry majors who wish to conduct an independent
project on a specific topic in chemistry. The project
will be supervised by a faculty member. The course
requires a final scholarly report detailing the finding of
the project. This course may be taken more than once for
lengthy projects.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

CHEM 540 Internship in Chemistry
1 to 15 cr
Offers the upper-level chemistry major an opportunity to
practice chemistry in an appropriate professional situation.
The student will work with a faculty sponsor and an
off-campus supervisor in gaining experience significant to
the major.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

CSCI 101 Introduction to Computer Science 
3 cr
Introduces entering computer science majors to various
topics used throughout the curriculum. Topics include
computer hardware, operating systems, file systems, file
types, protocols and networking.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 121 Programming in Java I 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of program development using
the Java programming language. Topics include variables,
control structures, arrays, string manipulation and an
introduction to object oriented concepts.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 122 Programming in Java II 
3 cr
Continues the study of object oriented programming
and the Java language. Topics include file manipulation,
method and class definitions, graphic applications, applets,
multimedia, events and interfaces.
Prerequisite: CSCI 121

CSCI 208 Graphics I 
3 cr
Provides a broad overview of computer graphics. Students
will use proprietary and open source software to integrate
images and text. The course includes demonstrations, lectures,
presentations and hands-on projects. It is expected
that students will have access to a digital camera and that
students will work with their own images.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 210 Networking Theory and Administration I
3 cr
Introduces students to topics in networking theory such as
protocols, protocol stacks, encryption and security. Basic
network troubleshooting and administration will also be
covered.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 211 Networking Theory and Administration II
3 cr
Introduces students to advanced topics in networking
theory such as flow control and congestion control algorithms,
routing algorithms, multiple access algorithms,
and error detection and correction algorithms. Advanced
troubleshooting and network administration will be covered.
Prerequisite: CSCI 210

CSCI 221 Programming in Java III 
3 cr
Continues the study of object oriented programming and
the Java language. This course focuses on the development
of graphical user interfaces and animated simulations and
games using object oriented programming techniques.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122

CSCI 222 Programming in Java IV 
3 cr
Continues the study of object-oriented programming and
the Java language. Topics include advanced data structures,
input and output streams and serialization, multithreading,
networking and object-oriented design methodology.
Prerequisite: CSCI 221

CSCI 235 Digital Circuit Design 
4 cr
Introduces the fundamental concepts involved in the
analysis and design of digital logic circuits. Topics include
number systems, Boolean algebra, logic minimization, and
combinational and sequential circuits. Students design,
implement, test and debug digital systems. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 236 Web Development 
3 cr
Emphasizes the client side tools and techniques used to
develop web applications. Topics include XHTML, cascading
style sheets, file transfer protocol and browser compatibility.
The course will also discuss effective web page
design considerations, including usability, accessibility and
information design.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 240 Introduction to Robotics 
3 cr
Introduces the student to the field of robotics. Students
work in teams to build a small robot and program it to
perform various tasks. Additionally, the course will discuss
the essential elements of robotic systems, including
motors, sensors, physical design and control.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 243 Database Development 
3 cr
Introduces the design, management and programming
of database systems. This course focuses on the design of
database systems using the SQL language, and will provide
hands-on experience with one or more database management
system products. It also examines the role of a
database administrator.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 246 Programming in C# I 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of program development using
the C# programming language. Intended for business
information majors, this course focuses on an introduction
to the visual studio development environment, simple
variables and control structures, and an introduction to
object-oriented concepts.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 247 Introductory Topics in Computing 
3 cr
Provides an understanding of a topic in computing that
may be of interest to majors or non-majors. This course
introduces a topic that is not currently part of the department
curriculum. Depending on the specific topic, students
will demonstrate mastery of course content through
programs, papers, and/or portfolio development.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 248 Programming in C# II 
3 cr
Continues the study of program development using the C#
programming language. Intended for business information
majors, this course focuses on advanced C# concepts
including structured variables, additional control structures,
object creation, code reuse and dynamic storage
allocation.
Prerequisite: CSCI 246

CSCI 252 Systems Development 
3 cr
Introduces the systems-development life cycle, information
gathering techniques and techniques of systems
analysis, design and implementation. Computer-Assisted
Software Development (CASE) will be introduced. Teams
will analyze and design portions of computer based systems.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 288 Web Page Design 
3 cr
Introduces the study of web page design using contemporary
design tools and development environments. Intended
for non-computer science majors, the course takes
a creative approach to web design that is facilitated by a
good working knowledge of technical skills. Course explores
theoretical, aesthetic and technical perspectives of
effective web page design. Upon completion, students will
be able to employ design techniques to create beautiful and
highly functional web pages.
Prerequisite: None

CSCI 302 Computer Triage 
3 cr
Intended for computer science majors. Topics include:
troubleshooting, problem solving and maintaining network
hardware and software.
Prerequisite: CSCI 101

CSCI 308 Graphics II 
3 cr
Builds on CSCI 208 and provides a broad overview of 3-D
computer graphics. Students will use proprietary and
open souce software to create and render three-dimensional
objects and scenes. The course includes demonstrations,
lectures, presentations and many "hands-on" projects.
Prerequisite: CSCI 208

CSCI 318 Computer Organization and Assembly Language 
3 cr
Introduces students to the major hardware components
of a computer system and to the organization of computers
as a hierarchy of hardware and software. Considers
the basic functional units of a computer system and then
examines the following levels:digital logic, microprogramming,
conventional machine language, operating system
and assembly languages.
Prerequisite: CSCI 235

CSCI 328 Object Oriented Design 
3 cr
Investigates system design using the standard object
oriented design methodology. The Unified Modeling
Language (UML) is covered extensively, as are the tools
and diagrams associated with it. The course incorporates
the use of software design tools and applications used in
industry.
Prerequisite: CSCI 221

CSCI 330 Programming in C++ 
3 cr
Applies programming concepts to the C++ language. This
course is intended for students who have studied another
object-oriented programming language for at least two
semesters. Topics include C++ syntax, data structures,
libraries, graphics and GUI applications.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122

CSCI 336 Advanced Web Development 
3 cr
Continues the study of World Wide Web application
development. This course emphasizes both client-side and
server-side tools and techniques used to develop web applications,
and will include various scripting languages.
Prerequisite: CSCI 236

CSCI 340 Robotics Development 
3 cr
Introduces the student to various development areas
associated with robotics. Topics include motors, motor
control, sensors, microcontrollers, physical design, basic
analog and digital circuit theory, software design, interfacing
and artificial intelligence. Students will construct
a robot or robotic system and choose to focus on one or
more of these areas.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122, or CSCI 235, or CSCI 240, or PHYS 251

CSCI 343 Server-Side Software Development 
3 cr
Focuses on the development of server-side applications
with database connectivity. This course merges the concepts
learned in Web Development and Database Development
to form traditional persistent multi-client systems.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122, CSCI 236, CSCI 243

CSCI 346 Programming in Visual Studio 
3 cr
Applies programming concepts to the language found
in the Visual Studio programming environment. This
course is intended for students who have studied another
programming language for at least two semesters. Topics
include syntax, data structures, graphics and GUI application
in a Windows environment.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122 or CSCI 248

CSCI 347 Intermediate Topics in Computing 
3 cr
Provides in-depth study of a topic introduced in an earlier
course. Depending on the specific topic, students will
demonstrate mastery of course content through programs,
papers and/or portfolio development.
Prerequisite: Department approval

CSCI 350 Introduction to Parallel Computing 
3 cr
Introduces parallel computing methods for both distributed
memory and shared memory architectures. In this
course, students will learn how to design and implement
parallel algorithms for solving classic computer science
problems, and analyze their performance. This course
covers several parallel programming techniques such as
Open MPI, POSIX Threads, Open MP, and Java Threads.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122

CSCI 352 Business Information Systems 
3 cr
Provides an examination of business information systems
that apply to all strata of organizations. The course will
view organizations as information systems and demonstrate
how computers are integrated in these organizations.
Students will engage in service learning projects
and gain practical experience off-campus, solving real
problems for various companies.
Prerequisite: CSCI 252

CSCI 360 Network Security I 
3 cr
Examines client based/end user security. This course is
intended for computer science majors. Topics include:
identification, prevention and recovery from security vulnerabilities
and threats to PCs, tablets and mobile devices.
Prerequisite: CSCI 211

CSCI 361 Data Structures and Algorithms 
3 cr
Introduces fundamental data structures such as stacks,
queues, dictionaries, trees, and graphs. This course also
covers the development and analysis of algorithms that
sort, search, traverse, and divide and conquer. Algorithm
analysis techniques covered include the RAM model of
computation, best-case, worst-case, and average-case
complexity. Students will implement data structures and
algorithms using a contemporary programming language
and serial and parallel programming techniques.
Prerequisite: CSCI 122

CSCI 362 Operating Systems 
3 cr
Students learn about and implement the fundamental
principles used by operating systems to manage processes,
memory, storage, and security. In addition, case studies
will be introduced to explore the implementation of at
least two modern operating systems.
Prerequisite: CSCI 361

CSCI 363 Network Security II 
3 cr
Continues CSCI 360, Network Security I and examines
networked systems security. This course is intended for
computer science majors. Topics include: identification,
prevention and recovery for security vulnerabilities and
threats to network data and networked resources.
Prerequisite: CSCI 360

CSCI 390 Junior Qualification Symposium 
1 cr
Ensures that students are prepared for their senior year
of study in the Computer Sciences Software Development
Program. Students attend class for one hour each week to
review material from the lower level courses in the program,
(100 and 200 level). Near the end of the semester,
each student will take a multi-part exam, which must be
passed to continue on.
Prerequisite: CSCI 222, 235, 236, 243

CSCI 408 Graphics III 
3 cr
Explores the history of CG animation and produces an
animation short using a 3-D graphics program. Students
will build on their skills developed in CSCI 208 and CSCI
308 and, working in teams, develop, refine and build a
computer generated short animation.
Prerequisite: CSCI 308

CSCI 420 Bioinformatics 
3 cr
Introduces the fundamental algorithms used in bioinformatics
and how these algorithms can be used to solve
biological problems. In this class, students will learn how
bioinformatics algorithms work, as well as how to obtain
sequence data from scientific databases and analyze these
data using tools available on the MCLA high-performance
cluster.
Prerequisite: CSCI 243, BIOL 240

CSCI 441 Teaching Assistant in Computer Science 
3 cr
Assigns students to assist a member of the computer
science faculty. Students will be involved in developing
materials for class, giving workshops and help sessions,
and evaluating computer science projects. A member of
the computer science faculty will coordinate, counsel and
evaluate students enrolled in the course.
Prerequisite: Department approval

CSCI 447 Advanced Topics in Computing 
3 cr
Provides advanced study of a topic introduced in an earlier
course. Depending on the specific topic, students will
demonstrate mastery of course content through programs,
papers and/or portfolio development.
Prerequisite: Department approval

CSCI 452 Software Engineering 
3 cr
Prepares students for work in industry. This course introduces
students to modern tools and approaches that will
allow them to design professional quality software.
Prerequisite: CSCI 343, CSCI 390

CSCI 461 Senior Project I 
1 cr
Prepares senior computer science majors for their final
projects and life beyond graduation. In addition to writing
and presenting proposals for senior projects, students
prepare portfolios and resumes. Course topics include
various writing styles, presentation techniques and networking
and communication skills. Students choose a
faculty advisor and begin work on the senior project during
this semester.
Prerequisite: CSCI 328, CSCI 343

CSCI 462 Senior Project II 
1 cr
Provides students with a final and substantial project. Students
work with a faculty advisor to complete the senior
project started in senior seminar. Projects are presented
during a public senior project day at the end of the semester.
Prerequisite: CSCI 461

CSCI 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Designed for students who wish to undertake an in-depth
examination of some topic of interest. The project will
be carried out under the direction of a computer science
faculty sponsor.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

CSCI 540 Internship in Computer Science
3 to 12 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who would like to gain practical
field experience in the computer industry. The intern
will work under close supervision of both industry and
department personnel.
Prerequisite: CSCI 222, or junior/senior status, or department approval

ECON 141 Macroeconomics 
3 cr
Examines the organization of American economic systems,
with comparisons to those of other countries.
Emphasis is on the problems of unemployment, inflation,
budget deficits and the possible fiscal and monetary policies
used to correct them. The course studies such aggregate
economic variables as consumption, investment,
government expenditures, and taxes. Course attributes:
CSS.
Prerequisite: None

ECON 142 Microeconomics 
3 cr
Deals with individual economic units, consumers and
firms. Topic areas which are covered extensively are
demand, elasticity and cost theories. The theory of wages
and its application to labor markets are also discussed. An
analytical study of market structure - perfect competition,
monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly - is
emphasized.
Prerequisite: None

ECON 216 Statistics for Business and Economics 
3 cr
Introduces descriptive statistics, including graphical and
numerical presentation of data. Uses probability distribution
as an aid to analyze business and economic problems;
application of regression models and hypothesis testing in
the decision-making process. Use of computers in solving
problems is emphasized.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier I Quantitative Reasoning requirement

ECON 290 Sophomore Special Topics 
3 cr
Introduces students to various topics of emerging importance
in economics. Examines one or more current issues
in depth.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

ECON 315 Environmental Economics 
3 cr
Introduces students to the economic analysis of the conflict
between our lifestyle of unlimited wants and the
scarce resources of our biological environment. Examines
economic theory and applications to explain the dynamics
of conflict. Uses an economic aproach to solving environmental
problems; students will research, analyze and
report on environmental public policy issues.
Prerequisite: ENVI 150 or ENVI 152 or ECON 141 or ECON 142 and junior status

ECON 340 Money, Banking and Global Financial Markets 
3 cr
Investigates the financial systems of the U.S., European
Union and emerging economies. Emphasizes how economic
institutions reflect the diversity of world cultures,
including major financial institutions, monetary theory,
interest rates and the structure and role of the Federal
Reserve. Issues include economic, social, political and
cultural integration of industrialized vs. Third World
countries.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier II Self & Society

ECON 343 Managerial Economics 
3 cr
Studies the application of economic theory to decisionmaking
problems in the private and public sectors, including
both explicit and implicit constraints imposed by the
environment on the decision-maker. Systematic development
of the theory of the interaction of consumers, firms
and industries; a study of market structure, conduct and
performance; and capital budgeting.
Prerequisite: ECON 142

ECON 348 Contemporary Economic Issues 
3 cr
Studies contemporary economic problems: employment,
inflation, economics of pollution, income distribution,
international debt crisis, the value of the dollar, balance of
payments and the federal budget.
Prerequisite: ECON 141

ECON 377 Economics of Culture and Tourism 
3 cr
Considers the economic aspects of cultural and other
events and activities on local communities and geographic
regions, especially as they impact tourism and quality of
life. Looks at how cultural goods are valued in both economic
and cultural terms. Examines the role of culture
and tourism in regional economic development. Analyzes
current public policy toward cultural venues at federal,
state and local levels in the United States and abroad.
Prerequisite: Junior status, completion of Tier II Self & Society

ECON 490 Special Topics in Economics 
3 cr
Studies a specific topic in economics for the purpose of encouraging
advanced work and research in a field of interest.
Content will be identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: Junior status, completion of Tier II Self & Society

ECON 500 Independent Study in Economics
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to study a topic in
depth. Final reports and frequent conferences with advisor
are required. Enrollment requires individual application
and department approval.
Prerequisite: Junior status

EDUC 150 Infant/Toddler Internship 
3 cr
Provides the daycare certification student with practical
experience needed for Office for Children certification.
The intern will complete an individualized learning
contract, sponsored and approved by an education department
faculty member. The intern will work under close
supervision of both the cooperating teacher and department
personnel.
Prerequisite: Department approval, EDUC 230 or concurrent enrollment in EDUC 230

EDUC 151 Preschool Internship 
3 cr
Provides the day care certification student with practical
experience needed for Office for Children certification.
The intern will complete an individualized learning
contract, sponsored and approved by an education department
faculty member. The intern will work under close
supervision of both the cooperating teacher and departmental
personnel.
Prerequisite: Department approval, EDUC 305 or concurrent enrollment in EDUC 305

EDUC 230 Program Development: Infants & Toddlers
3 cr
Examines theory and practice of daycare for infants - up
to age 3. Age-appropriate activities, program/curriculum
development and special issues in daycare will be discussed.
Working with parents, assessment, individual
difference and multicultural appreciation will also be
discussed.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 302 Assessment and Evaluation 
3 cr
Provides participants with a repertoire of assessments for
classroom use including formal, informal, formative, summative,
authentic and standardized. Participants will also
engage in discussions about reporting student progress to
parents. Students will learn a process by which to assess
themselves in their role as teacher.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

EDUC 305 Program Development: 3, 4 and 5 year olds
3 cr
Examines theories and practices of preschool programs.
Emphasis placed on building a developmentally appropriate
environment. Students will create a portfolio of curriculum
materials. Issues such as professional development,
parent-teacher relationships, assessment and evaluation,
and children's transition to kindergarten will also be discussed.
Preschool internships to be taken simultaneously.
Students will complete an action research project.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 324 Teaching Math/Science K-8 
3 cr
Supports the preservice and inservice teacher in planning
for the teaching and learning of science and mathematics
in the K-8 classroom. Major concepts, curriculum theory
and instructional strategies appropriate to math and
science education are explored in a hands-on workshop
format. Current topics, issues and movements in science
and math education are examined.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 325 Teaching Science: Elementary and Middle School 
3 cr
Organizes and plans for teaching and learning science.
Major principles of science, the development of science lesson
plans, experiments and demonstrations, enrichment
activities and science projects are included. The shaping
of science education in today's elementary and middle
schools is examined through recent science education
research materials.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 336 Reading in the Content Area 
3 cr
Examines effective strategies to support middle school and
secondary students' ability to use language to learn. In
addition to reading and writing text, alternative modes of
demonstrating learning will be explored. Technology will
be included through online assignments. Reflection and
professional growth are concurrent goals.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 338 Reading and Language Arts (ECHE/ELEM)
3 cr
Emphasizes an integrated, constructivist approach to
teaching the language arts based on cognitive, psycholinguistic
and sociolinguistic theories about how children
learn language. Teaching strategies are introduced that
help children learn to communicate effectively using listening,
talking, reading and writing. Organizational patterns
of instruction that emphasize literature, theme cycles
and workshop approaches are explored.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 340 Field Placement I 
2 cr
Acquaints each student with the contemporary setting of
public schools. In this pre-practicum, students will be expected
to be in a classroom for 48 hours. This will be the
first experience in the schools for each education student.
The on-campus component includes five seminar sessions.
Students may be waived from hours in the school setting
if appropriate documentation is provided but not from the
seminars.
Prerequisite: CCSS 269, department approval and 2.5 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 338 or EDUC 430

EDUC 341 Field Placement II ECHE/ELEM 
2 cr
Requires that pre-service teachers will assume a broader
variety of instructional responsibilities in an early childhood/elementary
classroom. Students will be expected
to be in a classroom for 48 hours. The on-campus component
includes four seminar sesions. Students may be
waived from hours in the school setting but not from
seminars.
Prerequisite: CCSS 269, EDUC 340, department approval, 2.5 overall GPA , passing score on Communication/Literacy MTEL Coreq: EDUC 409 or EDUC 412

EDUC 342 Field Placement II MDSE/SECE 
2 cr
Requires that pre-service teachers will assume a broader
variety of instructional responsibilities in a middle or
secondary level classroom. Students will be expected to be
in a classroom for 48 hours. The on-campus component
includes four seminar sessions. Students will be waived
from hours in the school setting if appropriate documentation
is provided but not from seminars.
Prerequisite: CCSS 269, EDUC 340, department approval, 2.5 overall GPA , passing score on Communication/Literacy MTEL Coreq: EDUC 414 or EDUC 416

EDUC 375 Coaching Principles 
3 cr
Facilitates an understanding of sport coaching based on
the most current thinking regarding principles that appropriately
guide coaching behaviors. Involves the study
of medical-legal, growth and development, psychosocial,
biophysical, training/conditioning, tactical/strategical,
organizational/administrative, ethical and professional
development aspects of coaching in a variety of competitive
sport settings. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status

EDUC 376 Sport Coaching Practicum 
3 cr
Provides an opportunity for the student to observe and
assist a coach. Students will experience a hands-on approach
to coaching skills, including participating in
emergency care and assisting with planning practices,
designing tactics and strategies in preparation for games.
Provides opportunities to learn duties and responsibilities
of coaches and athletic directors, rules related to recruiting
athletes and other rules and policies related to school
athletics. Requires 150 on-site hours.
Prerequisite: Junior status, PHED 375

EDUC 404 Sheltered English Instruction ECHE/ELEM
3 cr
Focuses on preparing undergraduate level ELEM and ECHE pre-service teachers to shelter academic content and
English language instruction for ELLs. Topics include salient
differences among ELLs; language structure; second
language acquisition; and effective practices based on the
SEI model. Students will learn to differentiate instruction
for ELLs at different English proficiency levels, focusing
on English Language arts, literacy skills, and academic
vocabulary in various content areas.
Prerequisite: EDUC 338, department approval

EDUC 405 Sheltered English Instruction MDSC/SECE
3 cr
Focuses on preparing undergraduate level Middle and
Secondary pre-service teachers to shelter academic content
and English language instruction for ELLs. Topics include
salient differences among ELLs; language structure; second
language acquisition; and effective practices based on
the SEI model. Students will learn to differentiate instruction
for ELLs at different English proficiency levels, focusing
on language and literacy skills, and academic vocabulary
in relevent content areas.
Prerequisite: EDUC 336, department approval

EDUC 409 Curriculum and Instruction ECHE 
3 cr
Plan, develop and assess instructional units designed for
understanding. Link designs to state standards and create
a continuum of assessment methods. Pre-service teachers
will be active learners as they participate in designing developmentally
appropriate lessons, units and assessments.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 412 Curriculum and Instruction ELEM 
3 cr
Plan, develop and assess instructional units designed for
understanding. Link designs to state standards and create
a continuum of assesment methods. Pre-service teachers
will be active learners as they participate in designing developmentally
appropriate lessons, units and assessments.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 414 Curriculum and Instruction MDSC 
3 cr
Plan, develop and assess instructional units designed for
understanding. Link designs to state standards and create
a continuum of assessment methods. Pre-service teachers
will be active learners as they participate in designing developmentally
appropriate lessons, units and assessments.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 416 Curriculum and Instruction SECE 
3 cr
Plan, develop and assess instructional units designed for
understanding. Link designs to state standards and create
a continuum of assessment methods. Pre-service teachers
will be active learners as they participate in designing developmentally
appropriate lessons, units and assessments.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 420 Classroom Management/Teaching Strategies (ECHE & ELEM) 
3 cr
Prepares one to design educational environments that support
all learners and to see classrooms from the learners
perspective including the learner whose cultural, linguistic,
social, psychological, or economic background is
different from the teacher or from the mainstream. Demonstrates
that managing classrooms requires attention to
physical, social, temporal, auditory, and visual dimensions.
Provides strategies to build the social competence of learners
who present behavior difficulties.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 422 Classroom Management/Teaching Strategies (MDSC/SECE) 
3 cr
Prepares one to design educational environments that support
all learners and to see classrooms from the learners
perspective including the learner whose cultural, linguistic,
social, psychological, or economic background is
different from the teacher or from the mainstream. Demonstrates
that managing classrooms requires attention to
physical, social, temporal, auditory, and visual dimensions.
Provides strategies to build the social competence of learners
who present behavior difficulties.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 430 Teaching in an Inclusive Classroom 
3 cr
Introduces values, laws and princples underlying special
education, including the rights of parents/guardians.
Identifies the role of general educators in securing supports
and services for individual students, and in developing
and implementing IEPs. Highlights strength-based
asessment, peer supports, assistive technology, Universal
Design for Learning (UDL), promoting social competence,
and collaboration with families, paraeducators, special
educators, and clinicians.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 460 Special Topics in Eduction 
3 cr
Studies problems, concepts, issues, topics, or themes that
are of particular importance in the field of education. Special
topic seminars may explore any of a variety of topics
concerning academic freedom, affirmative action, basics,
compensatory education, computers in teaching, multicultural
education, values, learning styles and human rights,
among others, as they relate to the field of education.
Prerequisite: Department approval

EDUC 473 Contemporary Educational Issues 
3 cr
Examines contemporary issues in education on idealogical
grounds and on national and local levels (e.g., bilingual
education, multiculturalism, general-liberal education).
These issues will be explored from interfacing viewpoints
(i.e., political, educational, economics, social) so that
students can formulate their own views based on careful
consideration of the arguments.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

EDUC 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

EDUC 540 Education Internship
3 to 15 cr
Interning in a public or private organization or agency
such as higher education, hospital, recreational or elderly
centers will occur. Completion of an individualized learning
contract sponsored and approved by an education
department faculty member. Internship may involve, but
is not limited to, education-related tasks such as training,
organizational development, computer-based learning and
human resource development.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

EDUC 550 Practicum-Student Teaching Preschool 
3 cr
Provides the culminating pre-K to K field experience for
teacher licensure. Students spend five days per week in a
preschool classroom for approximately one third of the
semester and the remainder of the semester in a grade 1 or
2 classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, the practicum
student works with individual children, teaches both
small and large group lessons, plans and implements several
units of instruction, and carries out a variety of other
responsibilites.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 560, EDUC 561

EDUC 560 Practicum-Student Teaching ECHE 
6 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher licensure.
Students spend five full days per week in a school
classroom for approximately two thirds of the semester.
In the role of classroom teacher, the practicum student
works with individual children, teaches both small and
large group lessons, plans and implements several units of
instruction, and carries out a variety of other responsibilities.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 550, EDUC 561

EDUC 561 Student Teaching Seminar ECHE 
3 cr
While engaged in the practicum semester, student teachers
have a need to be reflective of this experience. Under
the guidance of an experienced Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts mentor, this seminar provides students with
opportunities to share and to reflect on their efforts to successfully
merge theory and practice. The seminar will require
students to conduct action research in their classes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses Coreq: EDUC 550, EDUC 560

EDUC 570 Practicum Student Teaching ELEM 
9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher licensure.
Students spend five full days per week in a school
classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, the practicum
student works with individual children, teaches both small
and large group lessons, plans and implements several
units of instruction, and carries out a variety of other
responsibilities.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 571

EDUC 571 Student Teaching Seminar ELEM 
3 cr
While engaged in the practicum semester, student teachers
have a need to be reflective of this experience. Under
the guidance of an experienced Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts mentor, this seminar provides students with
opportunities to share and to reflect on their efforts to successfully
merge theory and practice. The seminar will require
students to conduct action research in their classes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores in all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses Coreq: EDUC 570

EDUC 575 Student Teaching Half Practicum ELEM
1 to 9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher
licensure. Students spend five half days per week in a
school classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, they
work with individual children, teach small and large group
lessons, plan and implement several units of instruction.
This half-practicum is designed to be used on very rare
occasions when a student needs to do a practicum over a
two-semester period of time. Students will register for 4
credits one semester and for 
5 credits the second semester.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 571

EDUC 580 Practicum Student Teaching MDSE 
9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher licensure.
Students spend five full days per week in a school
classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, the practicum
student works with individual children, teaches both small
and large group lessons, plans and implements several
units of instruction, and carries out a variety of other
responsibilities.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 581

EDUC 581 Student Teaching Seminar MDSE 
3 cr
While engaged in the practicum semester, student teachers
have a need to be reflective of this experience. Under
the guidance of an experienced Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts mentor, this seminar provides students with
opportunities to share and to reflect on their efforts to
successfully merge theory and practice. The seminar will
require students to conduct action and research in their
classes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses Coreq: EDUC 580

EDUC 585 Student Teaching Half Practicum MDSE
1 to 9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher
licensure. Students spend five half days per week in a
school classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, they
work with individual children, teach small and large group
lessons, plan and implement several units of instruction.
This half-practicum is designed to be used on very rare
occasions when a student needs to do a practicum over a
two-semester period of time. Students will register for 4
credits one semester and for 
5 credits the second semester.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on al MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 581

EDUC 590 Practicum Student Teaching SECE 
9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher licensure.
Students spend five full days per week in a school
classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, the practicum
student works with individual children, teaches both small
and large group lessons, plans and implements several
units of instruction, and carries out a variety of other
responsibilities.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 591

EDUC 591 Student Teaching Seminar SECE 
3 cr
While engaged in the practicum semester, student teachers
have a need to be reflective of this experience. Under
the guidance of an experienced Massachusetts College of
Liberal Arts mentor, this seminar provides students with
opportunities to share and to reflect on their efforts to successfully
merge theory and practice. The seminar will require
students to conduct action research in their classes.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses Coreq: EDUC 590

EDUC 595 Student Teaching Half Practicum SECE
1 to 9 cr
Provides the culminating field experience for teacher
licensure. Students spend five half days per week in a
school classroom. In the role of classroom teacher, they
work with individual children, teach small and large group
lessons, plan and implement several units of instruction.
This half-practicum is designed to be used on very rare
occasions when a student needs to do a practicum over a
two-semester period of time. Students will register for 4
credits one semester and for 
5 credits the second semester.
Prerequisite: Department approval, passing scores on all MTEL's, grades of C or better in all licensure courses, and 2.8 overall GPA Coreq: EDUC 591

ENGL 100 College Writing I 
3 cr
Explores the writing process, providing practical strategies
and techniques. Emphasis is on constructing texts with attention
to various levels of organization and development.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 150 College Writing II 
3 cr
Introduces academic writing, focusing on college-level
reading, writing, and revision. Emphasizes the writing
of informed arguments incorporating research and documentation,
application of theory, textual analysis, and
critical synthesis. Course attributes: CWR.
Prerequisite: ENGL 100

ENGL 202 The Personal Essay 
3 cr
Explores personal essays from the classical era to the present.
Uses a workshop format where students write a variety
of personal essays, choosing from among meditation,
confession, letter, memoir, portrait, prose poem, reportage
and humor.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 204 Media, Self-Identity and Society 
3 cr
Introduces the concept of self-identity, examining it within
the contexts of gender, sexuality, health and ethnicity
across media and society. Using interdisciplinary approaches,
this cultural studies course focuses upon themes
which explore myths about identity through analyzing
meanings in media and social/cultural texts; how these
originate in and across history, to become part of everyday's
common sense discourse. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: ENGL 150

ENGL 205 Introduction to Photography 
3 cr
Introduces students to photography, digital cameras and
photo editing programs. Topics include various forms of
composition for communication including documentary
photography. Combines lectures and discussion with
hands-on experience. Instruction includes camera fuctions,
exposure control, technical and creative control,
basic computer manipulation of images and digital output
options. Students must provide a digital SLR or point and
shoot camera.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 208 Experiments in Creative Writing 
3 cr
Experiments with various approaches to creative writing
by focusing on questions of originality and creativity in
language. Stresses the exploratory and playful approaches
both to language itself and, more importantly, to the production
of meaning in language which opens avenues to
effective creative writing.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 210 Essentials of Film 
3 cr
Focuses on film interpretation by emphasizing elements
such as light, sound, composition, camera movement, acting,
and direction. Initiates students into developments in
film history, film genre and film theory. Course attributes:
CCA.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 211 Introduction to Mass Media 
3 cr
Surveys various media, stressing their historical evolution
and the technological and socio-cultural forces that shape
them. Includes newspapers, magazines, film, radio and
television.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 212 Radio Production 
3 cr
Explores radio production values and possibilities. Includes
basic news coverage, scripting, preproduction planning,
interviewing, and audiotape editing and mixing.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 214 Basic Television Production and Broadcasting 
3 cr
Examines how television production employs verbal and
visual communication. Includes experience with principles,
theory, and the practice of television production and
broadcasting in the studio. Requires work on individual
and crew projects.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 221 Literary Journalism 
3 cr
Surveys the rich literature of creative nonfiction. Students
read and analyze the work of several contemporary
literary journalists such as John McPhee, Annie Dillard,
Gretel Ehrlich and Joseph Mitchell, as well as a sampling
of historical authors, such as Daniel DeFoe and Henry
David Thoreau. Students identify themes and techniques
of literary journalists and how these are similar to or different
from fiction writers. They also have an opportunity
to practice writing short pieces in this genre.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 231 The Power of Words 
3 cr
Explores the way words and symbols shape human
thought, behavior and institutions. Traces how meanings
arise, why communication is hazardous, and what makes
messages subject to misinterpretation. Provides useful
tools for functioning in a world in which language can be
misleading and even destructive. Course attributes: CSS,
LDRS.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 239 Writing and Reporting the News I 
3 cr
Teaches basic principles and skills involved in news reporting
and writing. These include interviewing, identification
of news values, formal and informal research,
story organization, lead writing, transitions, attributions,
and grammar and style, including application of the AP
Stylebook and Libel Manual. Students develop their skills
by writing several practice stories. They are invited to
contribute stories to The Beacon, the weekly newspaper of
MCLA.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 250 Introduction to Literature 
3 cr
Seeks to develop each student's ability to understand and
respond to a variety of literary texts by repeated practice in
textual explication through discussion and written work.
While most readings will be drawn from poetry, drama
and prose fiction, the course will also embrace, where
appropriate, texts drawn from mass media. (English/
communications majors may not take ENGL 250 to fulfill
their Creative Arts Core Curriculum requirement.) Course
attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 265 Literary Theme 
3 cr
Utilizes both primary and secondary literary and historical
sources to explore ways in which a selected theme
continually reappears in literature. Texts are examined,
interpreted and evaluated within historical contexts; critical
and comparative approaches are used to draw conclusions
regarding content and context. The specific theme
to be examined will vary and will be identified by subtitle.
Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 270 Literary Genre 
3 cr
Examines the question of how an author's choice of a
single literary mode, genre, or type affects the meanings of
a text. May focus on plays, short stories, song lyrics, comedy,
romance, novels, myths, or other genres. The specific
genre to be examined will vary and will be identified by
subtitle. Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 300 Creative Writing: Fiction 
3 cr
Focuses on the craft of fiction and the student's own short
stories. Literary works are analyzed for writing techniques,
but the emphasis of the course is on constructive
criticism of the student's work by peers and by the instructor
and on exercises to help develop imagination and skill.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 301 Creative Writing: Poetry 
3 cr
Features the art of writing poetry and a critique of the
student's own poems. Literary works are analyzed for form
and writing techniques, but the emphasis of the course is
on constructive criticism of the student's work by peers
and by the instructor.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 302 Creative Writing: Scripts 
3 cr
Pursues the craft of scripting, focusing on the student's
own writing of television, film, theatre, or slide/tape
scripts. Published works are analyzed for writing techniques,
but the emphasis of the course is on constructive
criticism of student work by peers and by the instructor
and on exercises that help to develop imagination and
visual literacy in the creation of dialogue, characters and
action.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 303 Writing Prose 
3 cr
Gives students who have completed their foundational
studies additional practice and instruction in writing
nonfiction prose. Explores the adaptation of such prose to
specific contexts. Individual courses may focus on prose
writing in a particular discourse community (e.g., business,
science and technology, education), which will be
identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 304 Creative Writing: Playwriting 
3 cr
Develops and exercises story-telling abilities through the
writing of dramatic works for the stage. Students will
explore the Aristotelian elements of classical drama as well
as the unities of time, place and action. Through activities
designed to improve skills used to create these elements
and through close textual analyses of successful models,
students will work toward the goal of writing individual
producible one-act plays.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 305 Magazine Writing and Editing 
3 cr
Studies the art of writing and editing articles for magazines.
Students will analyze current publications, write
articles on subjects of their own choosing and practice
editing skills. Class will include group critiques of written
work and individual conferences.
Prerequisite: ENGL 239 or department approval

ENGL 306 Business Writing and Presentation 
3 cr
Provides practice in writing strong, clear, and creative
business communications. Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Junior status or department approval

ENGL 308 Writing Associate Workshop 
3 cr
Offers students who desire to work as writing associates
both individual and group instruction in ways to respond
to student writing. Serves as a forum for discussion of
topics relating to being a writing associate at MCLA.
Prerequisite: ENGL 150, permission of instructor

ENGL 309 Technical Writing 
3 cr
Emphasizes principles of technical communication,
particularly document design and readability, and gives
students the opportunity to apply these principles in writing
reports, instructions, descriptions, and abstracts for
science, business and communications.
Prerequisite: Department approval

ENGL 312 Radio Practicum
1 to 6 cr
Assists students in creating advanced live and audiotape
productions of professional broadcast quality and/or assuming
positions of management in a noncommerical FM
radio station. Credit determined by extent of project(s).
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 313 Global Anglophone Language and Literature
3 cr
Analyzes Global Anglophone Literature and Postcolonial
theory with a particular focus on writing from and about
Africa, the Caribbean, and India. Discussions will center
on questions of language, representation, and form. We
will explore the various aesthetic strategies and techniques
employed by writers to communicate contemporary postcolonial
themes, such as neocolonialism, globalization,
nationalism, imperialism, feminism, migration, hybridity,
and diaspora. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250

ENGL 314 Advanced TV Production and Broadcasting 
3 cr
Acquaints students with the theoretical and practical applications
of television broadcasting systems. Focuses on
theoretical and practical projects; particular attention will
be paid to broadcast journalism with special emphasis on
investigative reporting. Students will also become familiar
with other aspects of television studio facilities.
Prerequisite: ENGL 214

ENGL 315 Constructing the Short Film 
3 cr
Acquaints students with the various aspects of the film
production process through the use of videotape. This
course gives students an understanding of the kinds of decisions
filmmakers encounter and the kinds of techniques
they employ. Activities include preparing detailed shooting
scripts, experimenting with photography, light, color,
motion, sound and editing, and manipulating both live
action and animated materials. Individually or in small
groups, students will produce a 10-15 minute film.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 316 Broadcast Delivery 
3 cr
Focuses on the analysis and development of techniques
and skills needed for performance of news, commercials,
editorials and "on scene" reporting. Emphasizes voice
quality, diction and presentational skills. Critical assessment
of professionals is stressed. Culminates in the
production of professional audition videotapes.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 318 The Popular Arts as Business 
3 cr
Examines and analyzes various aspects of the relationships
between the creative artist, the artistic creation and the
commercial marketplace. Through individual and group
projects, explores questions of artistic product design,
funding sources, costs and profits, and distribution and
marketing. The specific arts under consideration include
such possible areas as film and television, radio, theatre,
music, visual arts and publishing.
Prerequisite: ENGL 211 or department approval

ENGL 319 Global Issues in Communications 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of global communication.
Provides the student with a general knowledge of the
geopolitical issues of international communication, including
technological, economic and political/ideological
patterns. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 211

ENGL 321 News Editing Practicum
1 to 6 cr
Concentrates on editing and the functions of a newspaper
editor. Fills the junior staff position of the college newspaper
to refine writing, design and layout skills.
Prerequisite: ENGL 339 and instructor approval

ENGL 323 Publication Design and Typography 
3 cr
Studies contemporary layouts and design principles, with
special emphasis on integrating content, typography and
design for a "total communications package". Includes
basic typography and an overview of printing processes
and composing methods. Students create layouts for brochures,
newsletters, newspapers and magazines, and may
utilize computer graphics programs.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 324 Broadcast Journalism 
3 cr
Emphasizes investigative reporting as it relates to gathering,
writing and presenting news and documentary for
television. Examines the practical and theoretical concepts
of electronic news gathering (ENG) and electronic
field production (EFP). Analyzes standards for broadcast
journalism.
Prerequisite: ENGL 239, ENGL 214, instructor approval

ENGL 328 Issues in Journalism 
3 cr
Discusses issues and problems central to the practice of
journalism and the role of the media in a democratic society.
Issues may include environmental journalism; media,
law and ethics; investigative reporting; government,
politics and the press; covering popular culture and others.
Students may be required to produce journalism articles
and/or commentaries based on those or related issues.
Prerequisite: None

ENGL 331 The Story of English 
3 cr
Explores the history and development of the English language
from the Anglo Saxon to its current evolution as a
world language. Traces the growth of the language in historical,
cultural and literary contexts, using diverse texts
and films, with special emphasis on varieties of English
spoken and written in the New World. Students research
special topics.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 337 Advanced Photography 
3 cr
Builds upon skills learned in Introduction to Black and
White Photography, to include sophisticated camera
techniques and advanced darkroom developing and
procedures. Students are encouraged to develop various
forms of composition such as photography for science, art
or publication. Some consideration will be given to digital
photography and related procedures.
Prerequisite: ENGL 205

ENGL 338 Photojournalism 
3 cr
Concentrates on photojournalism as a form of composition.
Designed to help students to understand and master
a number of techniques such as story-telling and photo
editing. The subject of ethics will also be covered, as will
digital camera applications. Students will be encouraged
to submit work to The Beacon for consideration.
Prerequisite: ENGL 205

ENGL 339 Writing and Reporting News II 
3 cr
Offers writing and reporting experience through the writing
of advanced news stories and features. These include
covering campus community meetings, reporting on
police, fire and safety news and concerns, dealing with
local courts and investigative level-two reporting. Students
expand their knowledge of ethics, libel, privacy and
freedom of information laws. Students may submit stories
to The Beacon.
Prerequisite: ENGL 239 or permission of instructor

ENGL 340 Literature and Society 
3 cr
Discusses and analyzes a variety of literary works that
illuminate social issues. Integrates literature with other
disciplines by focusing on several contemporary themes of
social relevance.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250

ENGL 341 Hybrid Poetics 
3 cr
Investigates a range of experimental literary texts that
cross, blur, or recombine different modes and genres
of writing, in order to invent new forms of expression.
Students explore the porous borders between poetry and
prose, the creative and the critical, the visual and the
verbal, the oral and the written, the factual and the imaginative.
In their own writing, students are invited to move
between two types of writing, creative and analytical, that
are ordinarily kept separate.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status or instructor approval

ENGL 349 Critical Reading 
3 cr
Explores different ways of reading a text. Students use
diverse critical methods to consider the distinct understandings
of a text produced by different reading methods.
Examines connections between developments in critical
theory and parallel developments in philosophy, art and
film criticism and social theory. A variety of critical methods
will be examined.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 351 William Shakespeare 
3 cr
Considers such works as the Sonnets, Midsummer Night's
Dream, Measure for Measure and The Tempest.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 353 Hawthorne and Melville 
3 cr
Studies the chief works of Nathaniel Hawthorne and
Herman Melville with particular attention to their innovations
in American letters. Includes such works as
Typee, Moby-Dick, Billy Budd, The Scarlet Letter, and The
Tanglewood Tales.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 356 James Joyce 
3 cr
Considers works such as Ulysses, Finnegan's Wake and
Dubliners.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 357 Virginia Woolf 
3 cr
Studies novels and essays through which Woolf experimented
with ways that writing creates different types of
meanings and experiences. Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 359 Toni Morrison 
3 cr
Considers works by Toni Morrison, the Nobel-Prize winning
novelist. Readings from such works as Sula, Beloved,
etc. Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 361 John Steinbeck 
3 cr
Considers the vision of the Nobel Prize-winning author of
The Red Pony, Of Mice and Men and Travels with Charley.
Examines texts drawn from throughout Steinbeck's career,
with special attention to the common themes, preoccupations
and narrative devices which characterize his works.
Readings will be drawn from such works as Cannery Row,
The Grapes of Wrath and The Winter of Our Discontent.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 362 Marianne Moore and Elizabeth Bishop 
3 cr
Studies the poems of the eminent American poets, Marianne
Moore and Elizabeth Bishop, exploring the means of
production of American poetry; cross influences among
poets in the modern age; poetic spirituality and established
religion; and, most importantly, what it has meant
to be a woman and a poet in this century. Course attributes:
WMST.
Prerequisite: ENGL250 or department approval

ENGL 365 Reading the Graphic Novel 
3 cr
Explores the graphic novel and related forms. Examines
the meaning of the proliferation of this literary form as
well as the perceptual mechanisms and processes involved
in reading image.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 366 The Age of Chaucer 
3 cr
Studies the works of the late middle ages in England. It
will include such issues as courtly love, the practice of
allegory, the role of dream visions in literature, and the
relation of medieval religious-social order and literature.
Includes such writers as Chaucer, Malory, the Pearl Poet.
The course may at times also include selections from Old
English texts, notably Beowulf or Dream of the Rood and
from later Arthurian legends.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 368 The Age of Milton 
3 cr
Studies Milton's major works, emphasizing the relation
between his development as a poet and the intellectual and
social currents of the Puritan Revolution and of the restoration
of the monarchy. Includes such works as "On the
Morning of Christ's Nativity," "L'Allegro," "II Penseroso,"
"Lycidas," "Samson Agonistes," and "Paradise Lost".
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 368H Honors: The Age of Milton 
3 cr
Studies Milton's major works, emphasizing the relation
between his development as a poet and the intellectual
and social currents of the Puritan Revolution and of the
restoration of the monarchy. Includes such works as "On
the Morning of Christ's Nativity," "L'Allegro," "II Penseroso,"
"Lycidas," "Sampson Agonistes," and "Paradise Lost".
Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 370 The Romantic Movement 
3 cr
Surveys one of the most pervasive and important social,
intellectual and literary movements of the modern age.
The course will examine the varied roots of Romanticism
and then follow various threads of the movement as they
develop, diverge and are revived. The course will also
consider the relation between important terms such as
"enlightenment," "romance," "reality" and "imagination."
Students will pursue the links between the romantic impulse
and both modernism and postmodernism.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

ENGL 371 The American Renaissance 
3 cr
Surveys texts from such authors as Emerson, Dickinson,
Thoreau, Alcott, Fuller, Melville, Hawthorne, Whitman,
Douglas. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 372 Arts of Medieval and Renaissance Britain 
3 cr
Explores medieval and Renaissance British literature,
history and culture. The course includes a spring break
travel component. During travel students contextualize
literature with the cultural heritage experienced via visual
arts architecture, music, theatre, dance, fashion, food, and
landscapes and cityscapes of Britain.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250, sophomore status, instructor approval (Students pay travel fee)

ENGL 372H Honors: Arts of Medieval and Renaissance Britain 
3 cr
Explores medieval and Renaissance British literature, history
and culture. The course includes a spring break travel
component. During travel, students contextualize literature
with the cultural heritage experienced via the visual
arts, architecture, music, theatre, dance, fashion, food, and
landscapes and cityscapes of Britain. Course attributes:
HONR.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250, sophomore status, instructor approval (Students pay travel fee)

ENGL 374 Literature and the Environment 
3 cr
Studies particular texts in their historical, philosophical
and social contexts. Students will practice using evidence
from those various contexts to sharpen their sense of how
literary works steer the reader toward conclusions about
the value of the world each text presumes for itself. Readings
will be drawn from more than one genre within a
particular historical period. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 375 Civil War in Literature and Film 
3 cr
Considers texts which focus on the American Civil War
for thematic and generic purposes.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 377 Novel in Context 
3 cr
Examines the genre of the novel written in English, setting
it in historical and cultural context. Traces the development
of the novel, locating in even its earliest examples
characteristic methods and concerns. Explores the prose
narratives and epistolary writing of the 17th century as influential
predecessors of the novel genre, progressing from
that base to studying key examples of novels from the 18th
century through the present.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250

ENGL 378 Sports Literature 
3 cr
Studies how works of fiction, poetry, journalism, biography
and cinema are set in the context of sports and the
sporting experience. Explores how these texts define,
comment on and shape the sports context.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 379 Science, Literature, Gender 
3 cr
Studies particular texts in their historical, philosophical
and social contexts. Students will practice using evidence
from those various contexts to sharpen their sense of how
literary works steer the reader toward conclusions about
the value of the world each text presumes for itself. Readings
will be drawn from more than one genre within a
particular historical period.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 381 African American Literature 
3 cr
Surveys texts drawn from such writers as Hughes, Dubois,
Wright, Morrison, Giovanni, Reed, Douglas, etc. Course
attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 383 Whitman and the New World Poets 
3 cr
Explores the ground-breaking work of Walt Whitman and
other New World poets (Williams, Hughes, Sandburg, Roethke,
Ginsberg, Brooks, and Neruda). Analysis will focus
on what makes these poets essential and definably American
- expressive in form and content of the New World
experience. Students will read widely in collected works.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 384 Native American Literature 
3 cr
Surveys a range of texts drawn from such writers as Silko,
Erdrich, Momaday, Black Elk, Vizenor, Welch and Apes.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 385 Irish American Literature 
3 cr
Surveys a range of texts drawn from Irish-American authors.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 386 Jewish American Literature 
3 cr
Surveys a range of texts drawn from such authors as Bellow,
Roth, Ozick, Gluck, Malamud, Ginsberg and Elkins.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 387 Latino/a American Literature 
3 cr
Studies texts focusing on the Latino/a experience in the
United States. Considers the history of immigration,
assimilation, resistance and bi-lingualism which have
marked writers placing their vision within the frame of
Latino/a history; it will pay particular attention to how
such texts set forth a Latino/a experience as both part of
and as also distinct from other cultural strands in the
United States. Includes such writers as Villareal, Rodriguez,
Perez-Firmat, Zamora, Alvares Islas, and Pena.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 389 Contemporary American Literature: 
3 cr
Survyes representative literary texts from the margins and
boundaries of the American experience. Concentrates on
familiarizing students with issues, questions and motifs
that recur in works which diagnose ongoing conflicts in
the American temper. Readings are drawn from both the
margins and mainstream of American literary traditions
and all eras. Content identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: ENGL250 or department approval

ENGL 390 Asian American Literature 
3 cr
Examines the literature of some of the diverse groups that
make up Asian America, from early immigrant to contemporary
times. The course will address how Asian American
writers find resources for identity and where they see
identity questioned or undermined. Students will also
explore the lines of continuity among texts and writers as
well as examine the various styles and visions used by this
varied group of writers. Includes such writers as Chin,
Hagedorn, Hwang, Kingston, Law-Yone, Lee, Mukherjee,
Okada, Santos, Song, Tan and Yamamoto. Course attributes:
CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 391 Italian American Literature 
3 cr
Follows a course of readings from novels and stories by
and about Italian Americans, especially those dealing with
the immigrant experience. Explores the cross-cultural
dilemmas faced by those who found themselves in a new
world where old identities were challenged. Students will
be invited to discover the many ways in which our nation
has been enriched by the values and initiatives of people
whose roots were Italian. Literary strategies illuminating
this process will be analyzed along with the psychological
history of resistance and assimilation that made up the
drama of Americanization. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 392 Queer Identity in Contemporary Literature 
3 cr
Explores representations of queer identity by contemporary
writers working in a variety of literary genres including
short and novel-length fiction, the graphic novel,
poetry, and memoir. Authors may include David Leavitt,
Jeanette Winterson, Olga Broumas, Colm Toibin, Raphael
Campo, Alan Hollinghurst, Leslie Fienberg, Mark Wunderlich,
Alison Bechdel, or Michelle Tea. Course attributes:
WMST.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 395 Experiential Credit Portfolio Preparation and Writing 
3 cr
Provides students with help in completing a portfolio for
experiential credit. Includes a rigorous essay-writing component.
Prerequisite: Approval of the Advising Center in consultation with the appropriate department(s)

ENGL 396 Public Relations 
3 cr
Introduces students to the broad career area of public relations.
Principles, cases and problems of public relations
will be studied through contact with local organizations.
Topic areas include internal communications systems,
applications of mass communications, researching public
opinions and social responsibilites. Course attributes:
LDRS.
Prerequisite: ENGL 239 or ENGL 211 or department approval

ENGL 397 Special Topics in Film 
3 cr
Studies in-depth a specific issue in film and filmmaking
linked by one or more common contexts, such as genre
and subject matter, or historical, social, economic, philosophical
or aesthetic concerns. Students will practice using
evidence from those contexts to produce close, critical
readings of films that reflect both an understanding of the
context and an understanding of the visual and auditory
languages of film. Content identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: ENGL 210 or instructor approval

ENGL 400 Intercultural Communication 
3 cr
Studies in depth the role culture plays in the communication
process in various world cultures including African,
Asian and Central American. Examines the cultural
differences in language, thought patterns and non-verbal
communication behaviors. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

ENGL 412 Filmmakers and Filmmaking 
3 cr
Studies in depth a number of films by one or a cluster of
filmmaking professionals. The professionals may include
directors, screenwriters, editors, cinematographers,
producers or others. Guides students in understanding
the aesthetic, technical, economic and other concerns of
various film professionals, leading students to analyze and
appreciate a filmmaker's body of work.
Prerequisite: ENGL 210 or instructor approval

ENGL 427 Senior News Editing Practicum
3 to 12 cr
Focuses on the daily functions of the campus newspaper,
including editorial writing, news editing, page design/
layout, photography, newsroom and advertising management,
and budgeting. Fills editoral board and other senior
staff positions on the campus newspaper for the purpose
of refining writing, editing, design and other communication
skills.
Prerequisite: ENGL 321, instructor approval

ENGL 430 Advanced Poetry Workshop 
3 cr
Focuses on the work of the individuals in the workshop.
The work of established poets is analyzed for method and
craft. Weekly writing assignments are critiqued by the
class and the instructor for rewriting. There is a final portfolio
of 12 to15 poems.
Prerequisite: ENGL 301 or department approval

ENGL 435 Advanced Fiction Workshop 
3 cr
Focuses on creating finished short stories. As in ENGL
300, the major emphasis is on constructive criticism of
student work by peers and by the instructor.
Prerequisite: ENGL 300 or department approval

ENGL 441 Special Topics in Literature 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of literature. Designed
to provide advanced work in literary analysis, interpretation
and research. Primarily for majors in the junior and
senior year. Content identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status or department approval

ENGL 451 British Literary Survey 
3 cr
Explores the landmark texts in British literature. Readings
may include Beowulf and works by Chaucer, Shakespeare,
Milton, Johnson, Wordsworth, Austen, Dickens, Woolf or
Joyce.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 461 American Literary Survey 
3 cr
Explores the landmark texts in the traditions of American
literature. Readings may be drawn from the Puritan
and Colonial periods and from such writers as Emerson,
Thoreau, Poe, Melville, Dickinson, Twain, James, Pound,
Hughes, Eliot, Faulkner, Porter, Ellison and Walker.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 471 World Literary Survey 
3 cr
Explores myths, epics and other important texts from
around the world that have served as repositories of the
values of their respective cultures. Also examines more
recent texts that stand as efforts to shift those cultural
values. Texts studied may include such Greek, Hebrew,
Western African, Japanesse, Mayan and Islamic texts such
as The Odyssey, The Bible, The Epic of Son Jara, The Tale
of Genji, Popul Vuh and The Koran. Course attributes:
CRCU.
Prerequisite: ENGL 250 or department approval

ENGL 481 Special Topics in Mass Communication 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of mass communications.
Designed to provide advanced work in media analysis,
interpretation and research. Primarily for majors in
the junior and senior year. Content identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status or instructor approval

ENGL 490 Senior Seminar 
3 cr
Provides a capstone course in which majors meet in their
final undergraduate year to explore a significant theme
or topic. Students integrate what they have learned about
language, literature and media, and together the students,
pooling their special knowledge in these areas, respond to
the specific theme, concept or topic.
Prerequisite: ENGL majors only or department approval

ENGL 493 Teaching Assistantship in English/ Communications
1 to 6 cr
Assists the instructor with the organization, implementation
and assessment of individual English/Communications
courses.
Prerequisite: Department approval

ENGL 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

ENGL 540 Internship in English
1 to 15 cr
Provides a practical, hands-on field experience to supplement
classroom courses. The student works with an oncampus
faculty advisor and usually with an on-site supervisor,
and the two jointly evaluate the student's work.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior standing, department approval

ENVI 150 Introduction to Environmental Systems 
4 cr
Provides a foundation in the physical, chemical and biological
principles of environmental science in order to explore
Earth's terrestrial, aquatic and atmospheric systems.
Directly investigates freshwater and forest environments
of the northeast in the context of the scientific method.
Required laboratory. Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 150H Honors: Introduction to Environmental Systems 
4 cr
Provides an interdisciplinary foundation in the physical,
chemical and biological principles of environmental
science in order to explore earth's terrestrial, aquatic and
atmospheric systems. Historical case studies illustrate
political and ethical dimensions of environmental issues.
Lab exercises familiarize you with the forest and freshwater
environments of the northeast and how the scientific
method is used to analyze and understand the relation
between humans and the natural environment. Required
laboratory. Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI, HONR.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 152 Environmental Resources: Science and Management 
4 cr
Provides a foundation in the nature and properties of
natural resources in the context of sustainable environmental
management. Students directly investigate and
assess alternative energy options, watershed water-quality
management and wastewater management using the
scientific method. Required laboratory. Course attributes:
CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 152H Honors: Environmental Resources: Science and Management 
4 cr
Provides a foundation in the nature and properties of
natural resources in the context of sustainable environmental
management. Students directly investigate and
assess alternative energy options, watershed water-quality
management and wastewater management using the
scientific method. Required laboratory. Course attributes:
CSTL, ENVI, HONR.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 225 Nature of New England 
4 cr
Surveys the nature of New England and focuses on the
natural history and identification of representative vertebrate
animals of the region. It will introduce the physical
setting of New England, investigate various communities
and ecosystems of the region, and discuss nature in winter
and how animals cope with the extremes of winter.
The class format includes lecture, student presentations,
and class discussions of assigned readings. Required lab
component that includes field based activities. Course attributes:
CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 226 Nature of New England 
3 cr
Surveys the nature of New England and focuses on the
natural history and identification of representative vertebrate
animals of the region. The first part of the course
will introduce the physical setting of New England. Subsequently,
it will cover various communities and ecosystems
of the region, identify the distinguishing vegetation
for selected ecosystems, describe the natural history of
those ecosystems, and emphasize the identity, biology, and
ecology of representative vertebrate animals. Course attributes:
CST, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 250 Special Topics in Environmental Studies 
3 cr
Focuses attention on a special environmental topic or issue
at an introductory level of investigation. Course attributes:
ENVI.
Prerequisite: Sophomore status or instructor approval

ENVI 260 Green Living Seminars 
2 cr
Utilizes the format of individual reports and/or group discussions
of current papers, topics or problems in environmental
studies. May also be organized around a seminar
series with invited speakers. This course will be graded on
a pass/fail basis. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 299 Environmental Studies Practicum
1 to 2 cr
Offers environmental studies students an opportunity to
gain practical experience in an appropriate professional
situation. The student will work with a faculty sponsor
and an off-campus supervisor in gaining experience
significant to the major. Course can be repeated up to a
maximun of 
4 credits. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Department approval.

ENVI 310 Politics and Environmental Policy 
3 cr
Focuses on political science and government in national,
regional and international organizations throughout the
world. Topics include: United Nations, state and local
government, politics and economics of the Pacific Rim.
Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

ENVI 315 Environmental Economics 
3 cr
Introduces students to the economic analysis of the conflict
between our lifestyle of unlimited wants and the
scarce resources of our biological environment. Examines
economic theory and applications to explain the dynamics
of conflict. Uses an economic approach to solving
environmental problems; students will research, analyze,
and report on environmental public policy issues. Course
attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ENVI 150 or ENVI 152 or ECON 141 or ECON 142 and junior status

ENVI 320 Methods in Environmental Research 
4 cr
Investigates the methods used by environmental researchers
to formulate research problems, collect and analyze
data and present results professionally; examines sampling
techniques, field procedures, and limitations of equipment
and research design. Required laboratory. Course attributes:
ENVI.
Prerequisite: ENVI 150, ENVI 152, Tier I Quantitative Reasoning, junior status

ENVI 325 Geographic Information Systems 
4 cr
Geographic Information Systems/Science is rapidly becoming
the optimum approach for displaying and analyzing
both spatial and temporal data in virtually every
field. Through a series of "on the job" projects, students
will learn the concepts, terminology and computer skills
necessary to apply these skills to a variety of subject and
occupational areas. Students will complete a final project,
report and presentation using GIS in their area of interest.
Required laboratory. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ENVI 340 Environmental Law 
3 cr
Studies the development of an American consciousness
toward the environment throughout our nation's history,
emphasizing the political, economic and social forces at
work in the consequent creation of United States environmental
law. This law will then be considered in detail
through the examination of federal, state and local environmental
protection legislation, regulations and related
court decisions. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior status

ENVI 340H Honors: Environmental Law 
3 cr
Studies the development of American consciousness
toward the environment throughout our nation's history,
emphasizing the political, economic and social forces at
work in the consequent creation of United States environmental
law. This law will then be considered in detail
through the examination of federal, state and local environmental
protection legislation, regulations and related
court decisions. Course attributes: ENVI, HONR.
Prerequisite: Junior status

ENVI 350 Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Studies
1 to 4 cr
Focuses attention on a special environmental topic or issue
at an advanced level of study. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior status or instructor approval

ENVI 351 Ornithology 
4 cr
Provides an overview of the fundmental principles of
avian biology with emphasis on ecological and behavioral
aspects of ornithology. Students will learn to identify
about 100 regional species by sight and/or sound. A
semester-long project will encourage students to investigate
and read the ornithological peer-reviewed scientific
literature. Lab activities will include field trips to practice
identifying birds and collecting avian field data. Required
laboratory. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150 or ENVI 150 or ENVI 150H or instructor permission

ENVI 375 Aquatic Ecology 
4 cr
Focuses on the physical, chemical, and biological environment
of freshwater systems, as well as on common methods
used in the study of these systems. Concepts will be
applied to addressing current challenges in conserving
freshwater resources. Required laboratory. Course attributes:
ENVI.
Prerequisite: BIOL 100 or BIOL 150 or ENVI 150H or instructor approval

ENVI 401 Independent Research
1 to 3 cr
For environmental studies majors who desire to conduct
research on a specific topic in environmental studies. The
research will be under the supervision and direction of
the instructor and will require a scholarly report. Course
attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Department approval

ENVI 425 Advanced Geographic Information Systems (GIS) 
4 cr
Builds on ENVI 325, providing opportunities for conceptualizing
and solving spatial/temporal problems within
the student's primary field of study. Complex spatial
analysis, quantitative methods, process model building
and the substantial use of remotely sensed data will be key
elements of this course. Topics will also include geo-coding,
mapping ethics and 3-D map visualization. Required
laboratory. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ENVI 325 (grade of C or better)

ENVI 499 Teaching Assistantship in Environmental Studies
1 to 3 cr
Provides the opportunity for the student to assist in the
preparation and implementation of an environmental
studies course. This course will be graded on a pass/fail
basis. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Department approval

ENVI 500 Independent Study in Environmental Studies
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to study a topic in
depth. Written reports and frequent conferences with the
advisor are required. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

ENVI 540 Internship in Environmental Studies
1 to 15 cr
Offers the environmental studies major an opportunity to
practice in an appropriate professional situation. The student
will work with a faculty sponsor and an off-campus
supervisor in gaining experience significant to the major.
Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, departmental approval

ERTH 151 Introduction to Physical Geography 
4 cr
Studies the natural environment from a geographical
perspective. Analyzes the distribution and character of
environmental elements, including weather, climate, landforms,
soils, and vegetation. Examines consequences of
human intervention in natural systems. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 152 Introduction to Physical Geology 
4 cr
Studies the earth, including the origin and types of earth
materials, volcanism and crystal deformation, external
earth processes and development of landscapes, geological
resources, and geological processes as natural hazards.
Required laboratory. Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 245 Natural Hazards 
4 cr
Studies natural processes which are hazardous in the
context of human activities, including relevant geologic,
geomorphic, climatic, and meteorologic phenomena;
examines the origin and significance of selected hazards
from natural and human perspectives and explores how
people underestimate or misjudge risk. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 270 Weather and Climate 
3 cr
Examines general meteorological and climatic characteristics
through space and time, especially as influenced by
temperature, wind, and moisture. Explains atmospheric
disturbances at planetary, regional, and local scales.
Course attributes: CST, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 271 Landforms 
3 cr
Examines the description, origin, classification, and
interpretation of landforms. Analyzes geologic, climatic,
and biologic factors as landform controls and shows that
certain geomorphic processes are natural hazards. Course
attributes: CST, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 300 Topics in Earth Science 
3 cr
Analyzes and evaluates contemporary problems in Earth
Science. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ERTH 151or ERTH 152 or ERTH 245

ERTH 330 National Parks and Monuments 
3 cr
Studies the topography, geology, climate, flora, fauna and
scenic qualities of national parks and monuments by describing
the history of the national park system and factors
threatening its existence. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: ERTH 151or ERTH 152 or ERTH 245

ERTH 370 River Systems 
3 cr
Studies streams as environmentally significant landscape
features in the context of human activity; examines hydrology
and flooding, channelization, flood plains and
their land use patterns, water contamination and related
ecology. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

ERTH 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Independent effort directed to the in-depth study of some
aspect of earth science. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: Department approval

FPA 200 Dance I 
3 cr
Introduces dance ranging from traditional ballet to contemporary
modern forms. A study of the historical progression
and interaction of dance movement will accompany
the physical training.
Prerequisite: None

FPA 201 Dance II 
3 cr
Uses basic skills from Dance I to bring dance technique
to a higher level of sophistication. Phrasing will be longer
and contain more complex energy and level changes.
Students will explore the use of mixed meter as musical
accompaniment. Continues to use improvisation and
choreography as a vehicle to develop movement inclinations
and as a way of sharing movement experiences with
each other.
Prerequisite: FPA 200

FPA 202 Topics in Dance
3 cr
Studies specific aspects of dance. Provides advanced work
in technique, history and interpretation. Course offerings
may include but are not limited to: ethnic dance, tap, jazz,
ballet, modern, lyrical.
Prerequisite: None

FPA 500 Supervised Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a specific
area or pursue a project or topic in depth under the direction
of a faculty member. Frequent conferences with the
advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

FPA 501 Senior Project 
3 cr
A directed study exploring how the arts are interdisciplinary.
Seniors must present a final project in the context of
its time, taking into account the artistic influences and
social values that relate to the artist, performer, theatrical
play or musical creation.
Prerequisite: Senior FPA major

FPA 540 Internship in Fine and Performing Arts
1 to 15 cr
An opportunity to work in an arts-related job. Work situations
might include: a position in a theatre company; collections
management or educational outreach employment
in a museum; assisting in the management of a community
music ensemble or a school music program; work with
development, publicity, programming, and publication
for an arts council, gallery, or other arts business. Only 3
credits can be applied to FPA major requirements.
Prerequisite: FPA junior/senior status, department approval

FREN 101 Elementary French I 
3 cr
Introduces spoken and written French, emphasizing comprehension
and communication. Classroom time devoted
primarily to listening and speaking, with some reading.
Vocabulary presented and illustrated in meaningful contexts.
Lab assignments provide practice in writing as well
as additional opportunities to hear and read French. First
half of a one-year course; intended for those who have no
prior experience with French. Conducted in French.
Prerequisite: None

FREN 102 Elementary French II 
3 cr
Improves fundamental skills of understanding, speaking,
reading and writing French. Students will increase
their command of the standard topics of French grammar.
Short readings will enhance understanding and appreciation
of French-speaking cultures and provide topics of
conversation. Second half of a one-year course. Conducted
in French. Course attributes: CLA.
Prerequisite: FREN 101 or department approval

FREN 201 Intermediate French I 
3 cr
Reviews first-year college French (or high-school equivalent)
with a view toward building competence and confidence
in students who have been exposed to the basics of
the language. Exploration of selected themes in the modern
French-speaking world, as well as intensive exercises
in the oral and written language. Readings, discussions
and brief essays on topics related to French culture. Conducted
in French.
Prerequisite: FREN 102 or equivalent

FREN 202 Intermediate French II 
3 cr
Presents a selection of French literary works and cultivates
skills necessary to read and discuss them with
understanding and appreciation. Reviews and expands
grammar and vocabulary. Provides opportunities to learn
and apply fundamentals of literary analysis and criticism.
Readings include the major genres and represent a range
of French-speaking countries.
Prerequisite: FREN 201 or department approval

FREN 390 Special Topics in Francophone Studies 
3 cr
Studies a specific aspect of the French language and/or
a particular Francophone culture in depth. Designed to
provide advanced work in selected areas of study. Course
topic is identified by subtitle and may include areas such as
French society and culture, Francophone groups outside
of France, French linguistics and Francophone literature
or film. Taught in French unless otherwise noted. May be
repeated for credit with a change in topic.
Prerequisite: FREN 201 or department approval

HIST 103 Pre-Modern World Civilization 
3 cr
Studies the cultural and historical traditions of the major
geographical regions of the pre-modern world up to 1492:
Greece and Rome, South and Southeast Asia, East Asia,
the Middle East, Africa, Europe and the Americas. Emphasis
will be placed on such factors as international trade
routes, the spread of ideas and religions, and the formation
of state-systems that became the basis of the post-1492
world.
Prerequisite: None

HIST 104 Modern World Civilization 
3 cr
Provides an introductory historical survey of the major
events, ideas and people which have shaped world civilizations
since 1500, the beginning of the modern era of
history. Takes a comparative, interdisciplinary, and nonEurocentric
approach to historical analysis emphasizing
diversity and global awareness. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

HIST 200 Research and Bibliography 
3 cr
Acquaints students with the methods and materials of basic
bibliography and research. Introduces a variety of reference
sources such as bibliographies, periodical indexes,
government publications, handbooks, computer databases
and CD-ROMs.
Prerequisite: HIST 103, HIST 104 or department approval

HIST 203 United States History to 1877 
3 cr
Focuses on the development of American political, economic,
social, philosophical and cultural values and institutions
from Colonial beginnings up to 1877. Sufficient
emphasis will be placed on the Massachusetts and federal
constitutions to meet the state requirement. Course attributes:
CHH.
Prerequisite: None

HIST 204 United States History after 1877 
3 cr
Focuses on the development of American political, economic,
social, philosophical and cultural values and institutions
from 1877 to the present. Sufficient emphasis will
be placed on the Massachusetts and Federal constitutions
to meet the state requirement. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

HIST 205 Historiography 
3 cr
Provides students, in seminar style, with an introduction
to the classic issues and interpretations in the study of U.S.
and world history and political theory. Through readings,
research and discussion, students will become familiar
with important primary sources and major contributions
of scholars.
Prerequisite: HIST 200

HIST 305 Topics in European History 
3 cr
Focuses on either the histories of particular European nations
or a chronological period, issue or theme in European
history. Emphasis will be placed on a comprehensive
understanding of the subject matter as well as developing
skills in reading historical sources, research, writing and
oral communication. Possible topics include: Europe in
the 20th century; History of Britain; History of Russia;
History of France; Ancient Greece & Rome.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 310 Topics in Asian History 
3 cr
Focuses on either the histories of particular Asian nations
or a chronological period, issue or theme in Asian history.
Emphasis will be placed on a comprehensive understanding
of the subject matter, as well as developing skills
in reading historical sources, research, writing and oral
communication. Possible topics include: History of Japan;
History of India; Chinese Culture and Civilization; and
the United States and China. Course attributes: CRCU,
SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 315 Topics in American Studies 
3 cr
Studies areas and concepts in United States history and
politics. Students will gain a more advanced, interdisciplinary,
in-depth understanding of United States history,
politics, values and economics. Topics include: The City in
American Life; A History of New England; United States
Diplomatic History; American Values; Women in American
History; America and the Sea; Politics of Prejudice;
The Cold War; Environmental History.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 320 Topics in United States History 
3 cr
Focuses on a chronological period, issue, or theme in the
history of the United States. Emphasis will be placed on
a comprehensive understanding of the subject matter,
as well as developing skills in reading historical sources,
research, writing and oral communication. Possible topics
include: The Civil War; Immigration and Ethnicity; The
Civil Rights Movement; US & WWII; New England History.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 330 Topics in Latin American History 
3 cr
Focuses on either the histories of particular nations or a
chronological period, issue or theme in Latin American
history. Emphasis will be placed on a comprehensive
understanding of the subject matter, as well as developing
skills in reading historical sources, research, writing and
oral communication. Possible topics include: The United
States and Latin America; History of Mexico. Course attributes:
CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 340 Topics in the Middle East and Muslim World 
3 cr
Focuses on either the histories of particular nations in the
Middle East or a chronological period, issue, or theme in
the Muslim World. Emphasis will be placed on a comprehensive
understanding of the subject matter as well as
developing skills in reading historical sources, research,
writing and oral communication. Possible topics include:
The Middle East & the Modern World; The Muslim World.
Course attributes: CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 350 Topics in African History 
3 cr
Focuses on either the histories of particular African nations
or a chronological period, issue or theme in African
history. Emphasis will be placed on a comprehensive
understanding of the subject matter as well as developing
skills in reading historical sources, research, writing, and
oral communication. Possible topics include: History of
Africa; African History in Literature and Film. Course attributes:
CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

HIST 401 Seminar in Historical Periods 
3 cr
Examines a particular era in depth. The course will be
based around reading and discussion of a variety of historical
works with the instructor selecting course materials
and methods appropriate to the subject. Emphasis will be
placed on analysis, critical thinking and historiography,
in addition to mastery of subject matter. Central to the
course will be a major research project, with findings presented
in both written work and an oral presentation.
Prerequisite: HIST 200, HIST 205, junior/senior status or instructor approval

HIST 403 Seminar in Issues in History 
3 cr
Examines in depth a particular issue, concept, topic or
theme in history. The course will be based around reading
and discussion of a variety of historical works with
the instructor selecting course materials and methods
appropriate to the subject. Emphasis will be placed on
analysis, critical thinking and historiography, in addition
to mastery of subject matter. Central to the course will be
a major research project, with findings presented in both a
written work and an oral presentation.
Prerequisite: HIST 200, HIST 205, junior/senior status or instructor approval

HIST 405 Senior Thesis 
3 cr
The senior thesis is to be taken under the direction of a
professor in the department who will work with senior
history majors writing a bachelor's thesis on a selected
topic in history. Students will choose a topic and present
an outline and proposal to any department faculty member
or to the entire department sitting as a thesis committee.
The purpose of the senior thesis is to give students the
opportunity to do individualized, advanced research in an
aspect of history in which they have particular interest and
capability.
Prerequisite: Senior status or department approval

HIST 450 Career and ePortfolio Workshop 
1 cr
Provides senior students majoring in History with an opportunity
and framework to reflect on their past work in
the major and the wider liberal arts as well as look forward
to opportunities and challenges after graduation. Completion
of an ePortfolio will be an essential component. Students
will work with the instructor, career service professionals,
and alumni to understand career and graduate
school possibilities and prepare strategies for success.
Prerequisite: HIST major, senior status

HIST 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who desire to read widely in
a given area or to study a specific topic in depth. Written
reports and frequent conferences with the advisor are
required.
Prerequisite: Department approval

HIST 510 Teaching Assistant in History 
3 cr
Offers highly qualified junior/senior majors an opporunity
to assist an instructor in the teaching of an introductory
course. The student may be held responsible for grading
papers, conducting classes and review sessions, etc.
Prerequisite: Department approval

HIST 540 Internship in History
3 to 15 cr
Qualified students may be placed as interns in governmental
and social service agencies, museums, etc.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status and department approval

HONR 100 The Nature of Human Nature 
3 cr
Explores the problematic notion of human nature employing
the open-ended question-asking and interdisciplinary
discussion which characterizes the Honors Program. The
course ranges widely over philosophical, psychological,
literary and anthropological texts, as well as works of art,
which propose competing definitions for human nature.
Students are asked first to understand and then to criticize
each perspective in turn and finally to formulate their own
understanding of human nature. Course attributes: CHH,
HONR.
Prerequisite: None

HONR 102 Topics in Honors 
3 cr
Explores designated intellectual topics employing the
open-ended and interdisciplinary research and discussion
methods which characterize the Honors Program. Provides
an opportunity for critical examination at the honors
level in various domains. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: None

HONR 201 Special Topics in Honors 
3 cr
Undertakes a concentrated study of an interdisciplinary
subject to be determined by the honors director in consultation
with the Honors Advisory Board. Course attributes:
HONR.
Prerequisite: None

HONR 210 Director's Book Course 
1 cr
Reading of a single text chosen by students in the Commonwealth
Honors Program. The text is discussed and
augmented by student presentations on related topics. Includes
teamwork with Commonwealth honors students at
other campuses, perhaps meeting with the book's author
and attending lectures on specific related topics. Course
lasts seven weeks. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: Membership in the Honors Society

HONR 301 Special Topics in Honors 
3 cr
Undertakes a concentrated study of an interdisciplinary
subject to be determined by the honors director in consultation
with the Honors Advisory Board. Course attributes:
HONR.
Prerequisite: None

HONR 401 Special Topics in Honors 
3 cr
Undertakes a concentrated study of an interdisciplinary
subject to be determined by the honors director in consultation
with the Honors Advisory Board. Course attributes:
HONR.
Prerequisite: None

HONR 500 Independent Study in Honors
1 to 12 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who desire to read widely in
a given area or to study a specific topic in depth. Written
reports and frequent conferences with the advisor are
required. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: Department approval

HONR 550 Commonwealth Scholar Thesis Research 
3 cr
Independent research, writing, and editing of a Commonwealth
Scholar thesis under the direction of a faculty
sponsor and the director(s) of the honors program. Program
of study to be approved in the previous semester,
and culminating in a public presentation and defense of
the thesis. This course is repeatable for a maximum of 6
credits. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: Honors Program Director Approval

IDST 150 Introduction to Cross-Cultural & Social Justice Studies 
3 cr
Opens up a perspective on the history, contemporary experience
and cultural diversity of the major ethnic groups/
immigrant groups that make up the American Mosaic,
while also discussing issues of social justice and inequality.
The focus is on the U.S. experience, but the course will
also discuss the experience of minority groups in other
parts of the world through selected case studies. Course
attributes: CHH, CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

IDST 200 Introduction to Leadership 
3 cr
The foundation course in the Leadership Minor. A description
and comparison of major leadership theories
along with current applications and case examples. Also
examines issues of ethics, power, teams and women in
leadership. Each student will be involved in a service/leadership
and reflection experience throughout the semester
which will develop their leadership skills, and identify the
student's own leadership philosophy and style. Course attributes:
LDRS.
Prerequisite: None

IDST 220 Science in History 
3 cr
Examines western science in historical context, including
its relationship to technology and medicine, its institutional
basis and its relevance to politics and religion.
Prerequisite: None

IDST 224 Nuclear Age 
3 cr
Explores the history of nuclear weapons and nuclear-generated
electricity. Considers these technologies from the
perspective of national power and security, ethics, diplomacy,
technical practicality, safety and environmental
consequences. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

IDST 299 Introduction to Interdisciplinary Studies 
3 cr
Introduces students to approaches, methods and themes
in interdisciplinary studies. Draws on concepts and
approaches from selected academic disciplines (such as
sociology, history, political science, psychology, cultural
studies) to develop interdisciplinary frameworks for the
study of important issues in society, for example: self and
identity; gender and society; relationships and marriage.
Course topic identified by subtitle.
Prerequisite: None

IDST 320 Interpretation 
3 cr
Beginning with the consideraion of the raw data with
which scholars work, students proceed through the process
by which meaning is constructed and then through
the processes by which various interpretations can be
challenged or defended, with special emphasis placed
upon standards for distinguishing effective from ineffective
arguments.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

IDST 350 World History in Contexts 
3 cr
Focuses on the history of a geographic area, nation,
epoch, or selected social group. Students will critically engage
with a variety of sources, such as written historic documents,
oral histories, literary texts, music and cinematic
representations of past and present human experience
in local and global (particularly non-Western) contexts.
Course topic identified by subtitle (e.g. History of Africa in
Literature and Film; Women in History and Society).
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

IDST 360 Topics in Culture and Society 
3 cr
Explores complex and controversial topics in culture and
society from the vantage point of at least two diffeent
disciplines (e.g. sociology, history, psychology, literature,
cultural studies) and interdisciplinary perspectives.
Course topics identified by subtitle (e.g. Madness and Society;
Prison and Society; Globalization; Global Migration;
Popular Cinema and Society in India and the Diaspora;
Culture, Power, and Society; Nationalism and Religious
Fundamentalism).
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

IDST 395 Leadership Practicum
1 to 3 cr
Students engage in leadership and/or service experiences
either on or off campus and meet weekly for instructor-led
supervision, which comprises the presentation of selected
reading topics (e.g. teambuilding) and reflection activities
(e.g. journal discussion) in a small group setting. Leadership
Practicum does not count toward the IDST major.
Course attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

IDST 401 Senior Seminar 
3 cr
Available only to senior interdisciplinary studies majors,
this seminar requires students to carry out supervised
research projects within their areas of study and to share
the progress and results of their research with seminar
participants.
Prerequisite: Senior IDST Major

IDST 500 Directed Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to junior and senior IDST majors who wish to
read in a given area or to study a topic in depth. Written
reports and frequent conferences with the advisor are
required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

IDST 540 Interdisciplinary Internship
1 to 6 cr
Offers seniors field experience that actively and extensively
draws upon the concepts, principles, and skills of at least
two different disciplines. The internship must include a
strong writing component in which the student interprets
his/her field experience with reference to key ideas and
themes of the relevant disciplines.
Prerequisite: Senior status, department approval

ITAL 101 Elementary Italian I 
3 cr
Introduces the basics of spoken and written Italian, emphasizing
communication and comprehension. Classroom
time devoted mainly to speaking and listening with some
reading and writing. Vocabulary presented in meaningful
contexts. First half of a one-year course; intended for those
who have no prior exposure to Italian. Conducted in Italian.
Prerequisite: None

ITAL 102 Elementary Italian II 
3 cr
This course is a continuation of Italian 101. Speaking,
listening, reading and writing skills are emphasized. Conducted
in Italian. Course attributes: CLA.
Prerequisite: ITAL 101

MATH 100 Math for Educators I 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of numbers, operations and geometry
from an advanced standpoint. Explains the reasons
behind the usual formulas and algorithms of arithmetic
and geometry. Provides explanations suitable for the
various kinds of student learners. Covers the concept of
number, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division,
area and some fractions.
Prerequisite: None

MATH 101 Math for Educators II 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of elementary mathematics from
an advanced standpoint. Explains the reasons behind the
usual algorithms and equations. Provides explanations
suitable for the various kinds of student learners. Covers
decimals, franctions, long-division, similar triangles,
ratios, percents, probabilities, word problems, conversions,
rational numbers, irrational numbers, exponents, square
roots and math history.
Prerequisite: MATH 100

MATH 102 Mathematics for Liberal Arts 
3 cr
Presents mathematics topics designed to promote mathematical
problem solving, reasoning, decision making and
communication. Students will develop an understanding
of the nature, purposes and accomplishments of mathematics.
Topics selected from elementary set theory, logic,
number theory, graph theory, voting theory, functions,
difference equations and geometry. Course attributes:
CMA.
Prerequisite: None

MATH 150 Precalculus 
3 cr
Introduces topics necessary for the study of calculus. A
detailed study of algebraic, trigonometric, exponential and
logarithmic functions and equations, and their applications
to modeling real world problems. Topics are considered
from analytical, graphical and numerical points of
view. Course attributes: CMA.
Prerequisite: Placement based on SAT scores and high school background

MATH 200 Math for Educators III 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of elementary functions, algebra
and statistics from an advanced standpoint. Explains the
reasons behind the usual procedures. Provides explanations
suitable for the various kinds of student learner.
Covers order of operations, variables, introductory algebra,
basic statistics, functions, volumes and surface areas.
Prerequisite: MATH 101

MATH 220 Calculus I 
3 cr
Examines limits, continuity, the derivative, differentiation
of elemenatary functions, applications of the derivative
and an introduction to the antiderivative. The first of a
four-part sequence. Course attributes: CMA.
Prerequisite: MATH 150, placement based on SAT and high school background or department approval

MATH 232 Introduction to Statistics 
3 cr
Examines descriptive statistics, probability, sampling
theory and inferential statistics. Mathematics majors cannot
use this course for credit towards their major. Course
attributes: CMA.
Prerequisite: None

MATH 240 Proof I 
3 cr
Introduces sets, Boolean logic, combinatorics, functions,
and the basics of mathematical proof.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier I Quantitative Reasoning or instructor approval

MATH 250 Discrete Mathematics 
3 cr
Provides a foundation in mathematical topics central to
the study of computer science, emphasizing mathematical
reasoning and algorithms. Topics include propositional
logic, Boolean algebra, mathematical proofs and induction,
computer arithmetic, elementary combinatorics,
recursion, graphs and trees, matrices, sequences and summation.
Prerequisite: None

MATH 261 Linear Algebra 
3 cr
Investigates the theory of vector spaces, linear equations,
linear transformations, determinants, inner product
spaces, eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Prerequisite: MATH 240

MATH 281 Linear Programming 
3 cr
Examines the solution of linear programming problems
using graphical methods, the simplex algorithm and the
computer. Additional topics may include duality theory
and applications chosen from the transportation problem,
the personnel assignment problem and two-person, zerosum
games.
Prerequisite: MATH 261

MATH 286 Topics in Mathematics 
3 cr
Examines sophomore level topics in mathematics that
complement departmental offerings in mathematics or
math competency courses. Emphasis is on the nature of
mathematical thought and applications of mathematics.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier I Quantitative Reasoning or instructor approval

MATH 310 Proof II 
3 cr
Examines a wide variety of proof techniques (e.g. direct,
by contradiction, by contrapostive, bi-directional, uniqueness,
by induction, by counter-example). Students will
practice these techniques and learn how and when to apply
each one. Functions and relations will provide many
examples, and be covered in-depth.
Prerequisite: MATH 240

MATH 320 Calculus II 
3 cr
Studies antiderivatives, the definite integral, transcendental
functions, techniques and applications of integration,
an introduction to improper integrals. The second of a
four-part sequence.
Prerequisite: MATH 220

MATH 328 Interest Theory 
3 cr
Treats topics from the mathematical theory of compound
interest. Problems dealing with annuities, amortized
schedules, sinking funds and bonds will be analyzed.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 330 Calculus III 
3 cr
Studies infinite series, plane curves, polar coordinates,
vectors, vector-valued functions and analytic geometry in
three-dimensional space. The third of a four-part sequence.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 331 Probability and Statistics I 
3 cr
Examines probability laws, discrete and continuous
random variables and their probability distributions,
expectation, moments and moment generating functions,
sequences of random variables and Markov chains.
Prerequisite: MATH 430 or concurrent enrollment in MATH 430

MATH 332 Probability and Statistics II 
3 cr
Examines functions of random variables, sampling distribution,
limit theorems, estimation, hypotheses testing,
linear regression, correlation, analysis of variance and
analysis of enumerative data.
Prerequisite: MATH 331

MATH 340 Graph Theory 
3 cr
Investigates definitions and examples of graphs, graph isomorphism,
paths and circuits, connectivity, trees, planar
graphs, Euler's formula, graph coloring, four and five color
theorems and applications.
Prerequisite: MATH 240

MATH 344 Geometry 
3 cr
Studies geometries from an advanced standpoint. Some of
the topics that may be covered are non-Euclidean geometry,
geometry of the complex plane, affine geometry or
projective geometry.
Prerequisite: MATH 310

MATH 345 Game Theory 
3 cr
Introduces game theory terminology, zero-sum, two-person
games, minimax theorem, optimal mixed strategies
and applications to economics.
Prerequisite: MATH 261

MATH 360 Number Theory 
3 cr
Introduces the basic concepts of number theory: the Euclidean
algorithm, primes, divisibility theorems, Mersenne
and Fermat numbers, linear Diophantine equations, congruences,
unique factorization and quadratic reciprocity.
Prerequisite: MATH 261

MATH 362 Abstract Algebra 
3 cr
Introduces the study of algebraic structures with a detailed
examination of groups, their properties, and their
mappings, including both isomorphic and homomorphic
mappings. Cyclic, symmetric, and quotient groups will
be studied, as well as groups of permutations, cosets, and
normal subgroups. Also covers the Fundamental Homomorphism
Theorem.
Prerequisite: MATH 310

MATH 365 Mathematical Modeling 
3 cr
Explores the development of mathematical models that
solve different types of problems, including both discrete
and continuous real-world problems that are either deterministic
or probabilistic. Determines solutions analytically
and through the use of mathematical software.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 372 History of Mathematics 
3 cr
Examines the historical development of mathematics and
its impact from ancient to modern times.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 380 Differential Equations 
3 cr
Examines first- and second-order differential equations
with particular emphasis on nth order equations with constant
coefficients, differential operators, systems of equations,
series solutions, and Laplace transforms.
Prerequisite: MATH 330, CSCI 121 or CSCI 246

MATH 390 Numerical Analysis 
3 cr
Studies the approximation of polynomials at points and
over intervals; numerical solutions of algebraic and transcendental
equations in one unknown using geometric
and arithmetic methods; numerical differentiation; and
integration.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 430 Calculus IV 
3 cr
Concludes the four-semester sequence of calculus with the
study of functions in two or more variables, their derivatives
and partial derivatives, multiple integrals, line and
surface integrals, Green's Theorem and Stoke's Theorem.
Prerequisite: MATH 330

MATH 440 Topology 
3 cr
Covers various topological spaces. Continuity, connectedness,
and compactness are analyzed and compared. Applications
of continuity will be applied to the contraction
mapping principle. Analysis of product spaces and quotient
spaces. Alternate topics may be discussed.
Prerequisite: MATH 310

MATH 444 Operations Research 
3 cr
Covers various interrelated topics such as linear programming,
network analysis, game theory, probablilty and queing
theory, and optimization theory.
Prerequisite: MATH 430

MATH 455 Complex Variables 
3 cr
Studies the basic theory of functions of a complex variable
including complex numbers and their algebra; analytic
functions; Cauchy-Riemann conditions; and the differential
and integral calculus of analytic functions.
Prerequisite: MATH 430

MATH 460 Real Analysis 
3 cr
Examines the basis of calculus with a rigorous exploration
of the function concept from both a set-theoretic and
topological viewpoint with particular attention to the
completeness of the real number system, limits, continuity
and convergence of sequences and series.
Prerequisite: MATH 310, MATH 330

MATH 465 Financial Mathematics 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts of probability theory: discrete and
continuous random variables, and their probability distributions.
Covers Brownian motions and geometic Brownian
motion, the binomial model, the Black-Scholes formula;
the markets for futures, options, and other derivatives.
Discusses the mechanics of trading, pricing, hedging, and
managing risk using derivatives.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

MATH 486 Special Topics in Mathematics 
3 cr
Introduces theory that is an extension of various upperdivision
mathematics courses. Special topics may explore,
but are not restricted to: analysis, geometry and theory
related to modern technology.
Prerequisite: To be determined by the instructor

MATH 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

MATH 540 Internship in Mathematics
3 to 15 cr
Qualified students may be placed as interns in mathematically
oriented positions. The internship is designed to
supplement and apply classroom study.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

MODL 100 Introduction to Language 
3 cr
Investigates the nature of language, its function, history
and relationship to other aspects of human physical, social,
psychological and cultural development. Covers phonetics,
phonemics, syntax language acquistion, dialects, language
change, discourse analysis, nonverbal and animal communication,
language in society and other topics.
Prerequisite: None

MODL 101 Elementary Language I: 
3 cr
Introduces spoken and written foreign language emphasizing
comprehension and communication. Classroom
time devoted to speaking and listening, and some reading.
Vocabulary presented in meaningful contexts. First half
of a one-year course. Intended for those at the absolute
beginner level.
Prerequisite: None

MODL 102 Elementary Language II: 
3 cr
Strengthens spoken and written foreign language emphasizing
comprehension and communication. Classroom
time devoted primarily to speaking and listening, and
some reading. Vocabulary presented in meaningful contexts.
Second half of a one-year course. Course attributes:
CLA.
Prerequisite: MODL 101

MODL 495 Teaching Assistantship in Modern Language
3 cr
Gives modern language students the opportunity to aid in
the teaching of lower- and upper-division courses. This
course will help prepare students who wish to pursue careers
in the teaching of foreign languages. This course will
be graded on a pass/fail basis.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval, 3 semester hours in MODL

MODL 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

MUSI 159 Fundamentals of Music 
3 cr
Develops various ear training skills, including: sight singing,
melodic and rhythmic dictation, and an introduction
to harmonic dictation. These skills will be developed in
conjunction with an introduction to music theory: simple
and compound meter, scales, intervals and chords.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 205 Aural Skills I 
3 cr
Introduces techniques of ear training and dictation in a
sequential format with melodic sight singing using solefege,
scale numbers and note names. The course material
will include interval and chord recognition and principals
of voice leading.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 251 Introduction to Music 
3 cr
Provides a general historical survey of music and introduces
basic music theory. The objective of the course is to
help students become conversant in the styles and genres
of music in the history of western civilization. Popular
music styles are discussed in their historical context as
well as for their influences on contemporary culture.
Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 252 Piano I 
3 cr
Classroom piano instruction for students with little or no
musical background or experience. Emphasis on basic
piano technique and elementary music theory.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 253 World Music 
3 cr
Compares world music and the study of music in the
context of culture. Introduces students to the field of ethnomusicology
and explores the folk and classical music of
Asia, the Balkans, the Americas, and the wealth of ethnic
culture in the North Adams area. Course attributes: CCA,
CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 256 Guitar I 
3 cr
Provides students with a proficiency of basic guitar techniques
through study and performance of appropriate repertoire.
Assumes no musical background or experience.
Guitars provided on loan.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 258 Private Lessons 
1 cr
Studying privately with a professional musician, students
will take 10, one-hour instrumental or voice lessons.
Through this study they will advance their technique as
well as improve their musicianship. Students will study a
selection of exercises and repertoire with the studio instructor
and will prepare at least one piece for a final evaluation
or performance. Course may be repeated for a maximum
of 
3 credits. Two sections may be taken concurrently on
different instruments. Additional fee required.
Prerequisite: Department approval

MUSI 259 Music Theory I 
3 cr
Introduces musical notations and modes of analysis in a
sequential format beginning with basic staff and note symbols,
scale and chord structure, major and minor tonality,
etc., and continuing through key signatures, chord function,
seventh chords, inversions and harmonic analysis.
Mastery of skills is required before admission to the next
level (B or better).
Prerequisite: MUSI 159

MUSI 275 Performance Workshop Topic 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of music performance.
Designed to provide advanced work in analysis, interpretation
and research. Offerings may include, but are not
limited to: Building a Vocal Portfolio, Broadway, Gershwin,
Flute Choir, Performing Mozart.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 305 Aural Skills II 
3 cr
Continues material presented in MUSI 205. Advanced
work in dictation, advanced harmonic progressions and
20th century techniques.
Prerequisite: MUSI 205

MUSI 350 Instrumental Ensembles
1 to 3 cr
Perform with one or more of the following: The Massachusetts
College of Liberal Arts Community Band; The Massachusetts
College of Liberal Arts Jazz Band; Chamber Ensembles.
These groups perform music from standard and
contemporary literature and are intended for experienced
instrumentalists.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 351 Topics in Music History 
3 cr
Studies the composition, performance, reception and
criticism of music over a specified time period. A historical
study of music concerned with a composer's life
and works, performance practice, developments of styles
and genres, and place of music in society. Offerings may
include but are not limited to genre history, period history,
composers or specific works.
Prerequisite: MUSI 251

MUSI 352 Piano II 
3 cr
Develops keyboard skills. Attention given to chording,
sight reading, accompanying, improvising, performance
practice and the development of a repertoire.
Prerequisite: MUSI 252 or equivalent

MUSI 356 Guitar II 
3 cr
Develops intermediate-level performance skills.
Prerequisite: MUSIC 256 or equivalent

MUSI 357 Vocal Ensembles
1 to 3 cr
Perform with one or both of the following: The Massachusetts
College of Liberal Arts Concert Choir; The Massachusetts
College of Liberal Arts Chamber Choir; repertoire
includes choral literature from all periods.
Prerequisite: None

MUSI 358 Private Lessons 
1 cr
Studying privately with a professional musician, students
will take 10, one-hour instrumental or voice lessons.
Through this study they will advance their techinque, as
well as improve their musicianship. Students will study
a selection of exercises and repertoire with the instructor
and will prepare at least two pieces for a final evaluation
or performance. Course may be repeated for a maximum
of 
3 credits. Two sections may be taken concurrently on
different instruments. Additional fees required.
Prerequisite: MUSI 258, department approval

MUSI 359 Music Theory II 
3 cr
Continues materials presented in MUSI 259. Advanced
work in harmonic analysis, secondary dominants, higher
tertian chords, dictation and solfeg. Opportunities to
improve conducting, performance, and composition skills.
Further analysis of form, orchestration and arranging.
Prerequisite: MUSI 259

MUSI 360 Composing with Software 
3 cr
Introduces students to compositional techniques and
formal components of music composition using music
composition software. Students will write several pieces
of music and practice excercises to demonstrate the compositional
principles under study. The course will include
lecture and studio settings.
Prerequisite: MUSI 359

MUSI 369 Form and Analysis 
3 cr
Examines traditional techniques of musical form and their
applications in historical and contemporary styles.
Prerequisite: MUSI 359

MUSI 410 Orchestration/Arranging 
3 cr
Studies the technique of orchestration. Instruments of the
orchestra, instrumental colors, preparing the score, adapting
music for different mediums. Students will create one
large project (arrangement for band or orchestra).
Prerequisite: MUSI 359

MUSI 415 Counterpoint 
3 cr
An in-depth study of 18th century counterpoint with an
historical approach. Students will write an invention, a
trio-sonata and a fugue.
Prerequisite: MUSI 359

MUSI 450 Topics in Music Seminar 
3 cr
Provides advanced work in analysis and interpretation and
research. Offerings: Improvisation, Composition; Conducting;
History of Musical Theatre, Recording.
Prerequisite: MUSI 159

MUSI 458 Private Lessons 
1 cr
Studying privately with a professional musician, students
will take 10 one-hour, instrumental-voice lessons.
Through this study they will advance their technique and
improve their musicianship. Students will study a selection
of exercises and repertoire with the instructor and
will prepare at least two advanced pieces for a final evaluation
or recital performance. Course may be repeated for a
maximum of 
3 credits. Additional fee required.
Prerequisite: MUSI 358, department approval

PHED 103 Swimming 
1 cr
Designed for the non-swimmer wishing to learn to swim
and swimmers looking to improve their swimming skills.
Swimming as a lifelong health/fitness activity is stressed.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 108 Community First Aid and Safety 
1 cr
Provides instruction in basic first aid and CPR for the
adult, child and infant. Red Cross certification is provided
upon successful completion.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 109 Scuba 
2 cr
Introduces the skills of scuba diving. Successful completion
of this course leads to certification in NAUI, a worldwide
diving organization.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 110 Fundamentals of Tennis 
1 cr
Instructs students in the fundamentals of tennis and game
play.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 113 Fundamentals of Beginning Badminton 
1 cr
Provides the opportunity to learn skills and strategy of
racket sports, specifically badminton.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 120 Emergency Medical Response 
1 cr
Provides instruction in professional rescuer CPR, AED,
and first aid for the adult, child, and infant. American
Red Cross certification is provided upon successful completion.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 125 Fundamentals of Golf 
1 cr
Introduces students to the game of golf. Provides basic instruction
in a good golf swing and the following: putting,
chipping, iron and wood shots.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 132 Fitness for Life 
1 cr
Provides instruction in the components of physical fitness:
flexibility, muscular strength and endurance, and cardiovascular
endurance. Stress management and nutrition are
also discussed.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 144 Aikido 
1 cr
Focuses on an understanding of the principles of Aikido,
a Japanese martial art. Focus is placed upon mastery of
the fundamentals of the art to an extent that the student
will be able to apply correct stance, falling and rolling
techniques, and proper distance during the practice of
self-defense.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 146 Self Defense for Women 
1 cr
Focuses on awareness and avoidance of a possible attack.
Students will learn to punch and kick properly along with
basic self defense hands techniques. This is a beginner's
course in self-defense. Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 147 Fundamentals of Yoga 
1 cr
Teaches the basic Hatha Yoga postures, breathing exercises
and relaxation techniques.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 150 Special Topics in Physical Education
1 to 2 cr
Introduces students to a variety of physical education
activities. Activities vary according to teaching staff and
student needs.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 160 Strength and Conditioning 
1 cr
Designed for students to learn and practice techniques of
conditioning as it relates to sport. Testing and training
techniques for strength, power, speed, endurance, flexibility
and agility will be emphasized.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 215 Lifetime Wellness 
3 cr
Helps students develop a set of health behaviors that
constitute what is generally considered to be a high energy
lifestyle. These behaviors stress responsibility for one's
health. Areas covered are physical fitness, nutrition and
weight control, stress management, substance abuse, sexually
transmitted disease and chronic disease.
Prerequisite: None

PHED 375 Scientific Foundations of Coaching 
3 cr
Facilitates an understanding of sport coaching based on
the most current thinking regarding principles related
to training basics, energy fitness, muscular fitness, and
biomechanics. Students will learn to develop training
programs for better sport performance and to ensure the
health and safety of athletes.
Prerequisite: EDUC 375

PHED 395 Special Topics in Physical Education
1 to 3 cr
Explores a specific aspect related to physical education,
athletics, coaching or sports medicine. Content identifiable
by subtitle.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PHED 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to study a topic in
depth. Written reports and frequent conferences with the
advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

PHIL 100 A First Course in Philosophy 
3 cr
Engages students in the critical investigation and reflective
analysis of such fundamental philosophical questions as
freedom and moral responsibility, the nature of being and
knowledge, the existence of God and the problem of evil,
and individual rights and social justice. Emphasizes the
relevance that philosophy has to contemporary problems
and encourages students to think, read, write, and speak
critically and thoughtfully. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 110 World Religions 
3 cr
Examines basic texts, concepts, presuppositions, and ways
of life of several major religious traditions. Drawing on
both sacred texts and scholarly analyses, as well as fictional
and journalistic accounts, the course aims to understand
and assess the meanings of religion in human life.
Course attributes: CHH, CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 110H Honors: World Religions 
3 cr
Examines basic texts, concepts, presuppositions and ways
of life of several major religious traditions. Drawing on
both sacred texts and scholarly analyses, as well as fictional
and journalistic accounts, the course aims to understand
and assess the meanings of religion in human life.
Course attributes: CHH, CRCU, HONR, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 120 Art and Philosophy 
3 cr
Adopts a philosophical approach to the experience, understanding
and critical assessment of the products and
processes of the creative arts. Our inquiries will center
on two traditional questions of aesthetic theory: What is
art? What is art's special value? This course will be more
theoretical than hands-on, though direct, continued experience
in the various creative arts will be encouraged and
figure prominently in most discussions and assignments.
Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 120H Honors: Art and Philosophy 
3 cr
Adopts a philosophical approach to the experience, understanding
and critical assessment of the products and
processes of the creative arts. Our inquiries will center
on two traditional questions of aesthetic theory. What is
art? What is art's special value? This course will be more
theoretical than hands-on, though direct, continued experience
in the various creative arts will be encouraged and
figure prominently in most discussions and assignments.
Course attributes: CCA, HONR.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 200 Logic and Critical Reasoning 
3 cr
Examines and applies the principles of cogent, sound or
critical reasoning and writing, leading to a deeper understanding
of language and of the use of logical argumentation.
Considers, in the context of real life arguments and
claims, (in the rhetoric of philosophy, history and other
disciplines) formal and informal principles of clear and
systematic thinking and writing. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 200H Honors: Logic and Critical Reasoning 
3 cr
Examines and applies principles of cogent, sound or critical
reasoning and writing, leading to a deeper understanding
of language and of the use of logical argumentation.
Considers, in the context of real-life arguments and claims
(in the rhetoric of philosophy, history, and other disciplines)
formal and informal principles of clear and systematic
thinking and writing. Course attributes: CHH.
Prerequisite: None

PHIL 240 Ancient Philosophy 
3 cr
Explores the ancient roots of western intellectual history,
including contributions of non-European societies, in the
context of the politics, economics, language, religion and
technology of their times. Students will apply philosophical
and historical tools to investigate the development
of important ideas and schools of thought in the ancient
world and the consequences of those ideas in the present.
Prerequisite: PHIL 100, or department approval

PHIL 242 Modern Philosophy 
3 cr
Explores the roots of western intellectual history since the
European Renaissance, including the politics, economics,
language, religion and technology in which they arose.
Students will apply philosophical and historical tools to
investigate the development of imporant ideas and schools
of thought in the modern world and their consequences in
the present.
Prerequisite: PHIL 100, or department approval

PHIL 285 Special Topics in Philosophy 
3 cr
Challenges students at the sophomore level to understand,
construct and criticize both informal (natural language)
and formal (categorical and propositional) arguments.
The course considers in detail the very notion of argument,
argument structure and the criteria for constructing
cogent arguments, and distinguishes arguments supported
by evidence and reason from mere opinion and belief.
Students will learn to apply these logical concepts in their
writing, conversing and reading.
Prerequisite: PHIL 100, sophomore status, or department approval

PHIL 300 Epistemology and Metaphysics 
3 cr
Considers the origins, nature and presuppositions of
knowledge, as well as its relation to such concepts as belief,
fact, truth, justification and reality. Examines various accounts
of the most general features of reality, using categories
such as being/becoming, real/apparent, identity/difference,
existence, change, time, space and causality.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or instructor approval

PHIL 322 Business Ethics 
3 cr
Examines the values of a business society and the ethical
dimensions of decision-making in business, with the aim
of enabling the student to develop a meaningful set of values
by which to live and contribute creatively in a business
society. Course attributes: LDRS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 325 Environmental Ethics 
3 cr
Addresses recent and historical perspecive on the nature
and scope of human moral obligations to the natural environment.
Discusses the content and merits of competing
ethical theories and their implications for both intra-human
affairs and our place in nature as one of its creatures.
Course attributes: ENVI, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 335 Philosophy of Education 
3 cr
Seeing education as the principal means to full personhood
raises important questions about autonomy, authority,
creativity, and knowledge. This course will examine
various philosophical perspectives on these questions and
their implications for classroom practice.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 350 Contemporary Moral Issues 
3 cr
Views such issues as war and peace, world poverty, sexual
morality and spirituality from the perspectives of traditional
and contemporary ethical theories. Course attributes:
SOCJ.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 360 Social and Political Philosophy 
3 cr
Investigates conceptual and moral questions posed by life
in community with others. These include justificaions
of democracy, political freedom, natural rights, political
obligation, social justice and the challenge of anarchism.
Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 375 Ethics and Animals 
3 cr
Explores the potentially morally significant relationships
between humans and various kinds of non-human animals,
applying moral propositions that we, as a society,
subscribe to, to see whether they have unacknowledged
implications for non-humans.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

PHIL 375H Honors: Ethics and Animals 
3 cr
Explores the potentially morally significant relationships
between humans and various kinds of non-human animals.
Explores moral propositions that we, as a society,
subscribe to, to see whether they have unacknowledged
implications for non-humans. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

PHIL 385 Special Topics in Philosophy 
3 cr
Challenges students at the junior level, to understand, construct,
and criticize both informal (natural language) and
formal (categorical and propositional) arguments. The
course considers in detail the very notion of argument,
argument structure, and the criteria for constructing
cogent arguments, and distinguishes arguments supported
by evidence and reason from mere opinion and belief.
Students will learn to apply these logical concepts in their
writing, conversing, and reading.
Prerequisite: A 100-level or 200-level philosophy course, junior status, or department approval

PHIL 400 Contemporary Legal Philosophy 
3 cr
Examines the nature of law, the logic and sociology of judicial
processes and the relationship of law to morality, including
a comparison of major legal theories: natural law,
legal positivism, legal realism and Marxist legal analysis.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course, or department approval

PHIL 410 Constructing Reality 
3 cr
Focusing on the increasingly popular notion that human
beings, individually or corporately, actively construct, in
part or in whole, the world. This notion transcends disciplinary
boundaries, finding expression in such diverse
fields as biology, philosophy, psychology, physics, anthropology,
sociology, mathematics, theology, literary theory,
cybernetics and linguistics.
Prerequisite: A 100 or 200 level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 410H Honors: Constructing Reality 
3 cr
Focusing on the increasingly popular notion that human
beings, individually or corporately, actively construct, in
part or in whole, the world. This notion transcends disciplinary
boundaries, finding expression in such diverse
fields as biology, philosophy, psychology, physics, anthropology,
sociology, mathematics, theology, literary theory,
cybernetics and linguistics. Course attributes: HONR.
Prerequisite: A 100 or 200 level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 485 Special Topics in Philosophy 
3 cr
A philosophical topics course tailored to changing student
needs and interests, each offering focuses on a period in
the history of philosophy (e.g. Greek philosophy, medieval
philosophy, 20th century American philosophy, etc.),
the works of an individual philosopher (e.g., Plato, Hegel,
Hume, Kant, Descartes, etc.), or the critical examination
of a philosophically challenging concept (e.g., freedom,
value, meaning, truth, relativism, rights, justice, etc.)
Prerequisite: A 100 level and 200 level philosophy course or department approval

PHIL 495 Teaching Assistantship in Philosophy 
3 cr
Provides assistance to philosophy majors who intend to
pursue active teaching careers in the discipline. Students
will be assigned to a department member to assist in the
teaching of lower-level courses.
Prerequisite: Minimum of 18 semester hours in philosophy and department approval

PHIL 500 Directed Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: A 100-level and a 200-level philosophy course, junior/senior status, department approval

PHIL 540 Philosophy Internship
3 to 9 cr
Philosophy is applicable to a wide range of professions and
activities (e.g. law, business, education, public service).
The philosophy internship is designed to allow advanced
students with a particular focus or career goal to design
and pursue such applications with faculty suspervision
including a significant component of writing about their
experiences. Up to 
9 credits per semester, three of which
may apply to minimum major requirements.
Prerequisite: Senior status and department approval

PHYS 115 Physics for Future Presidents 
3 cr
Focuses on the physics and technology associated with
current complex world issues, including energy production,
climate change, water supply, privacy issues, etc.
Provides an overview of the physics needed to know in order
to make wise, informed decisions about issues such as
these. Strongly recommended for physics majors. Course
attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

PHYS 120 Introduction to Engineering 
4 cr
Introduces students to basic scientific methodology, current
problems and fundamental principles of engineering
design. Intended for nonscience majors and potential
engineering students. Required laboratory introduces
fundamental science and engineering principles through
collaborative projects such as robotics. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL.
Prerequisite: None

PHYS 131 General Physics I 
4 cr
This is the first of a two-semester sequence, designed
primarily for students in the biological and health sciences
and others who desire a rigorous but non-calculus-based
course that presents a complete introduction to physics.
Covers vectors, one and two dimensional motion, Newton's
laws, and rotational motion, conservation of energy
and momentum, gravitation, wave motion, sound, heat
and thermodynamics. Required laboratory. Course attributes:
CSTL.
Prerequisite: None

PHYS 132 General Physics II 
4 cr
This is the second of a two-semester sequence, designed
primarily for students in the biological and health sciences
and others who desire a rigorous but non-calculus-based
course that presents a complete introduction to physics.
Covers geometrical optics, electricity and magnetism, electronics,
modern physics, relativity. Required laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL.
Prerequisite: PHYS 131

PHYS 140 Astronomy 
3 cr
Looks at historical and modern aspects of astronomy.
Topics covered will include: the Earth-Moon system, our
solar system, galaxies, the observable universe, as well as
current research in astronomy, including quasars, pulsars,
black holes, other planetary systems and the search for
extraterrestrial life. Course attributes: CST.
Prerequisite: None

PHYS 151 Introduction to Mechanics 
4 cr
First course in a three-course introductory physics sequence
which utilizes a calculus-based approach to study
the natural world. This course focuses on kinematics,
dynamics, conservation of energy and momentum, and
rotational motion. Required Laboratory. Course attributes:
CSTL.
Prerequisite: MATH 150 or MATH 220

PHYS 200 Seminar for Physics Majors 
1 cr
Explores the discipline of physics in order to support
majors in their academic work and help them understand
their career options. Explores the diversity of fields within
physics through presentations, reading and writing activities
and interactions with peers and mentors. This seminar
is required for all MCLA physics majors.
Prerequisite: None

PHYS 251 Introduction to Electricity & Magnetism
4 cr
Second course in a three-course introductory physics sequence
which utilizes a calculus-based approach to study
the natural world. This course focuses on electricity and
magnetism, including Maxwell's Laws. Required Laboratory.
Course attributes: CSTL.
Prerequisite: PHYS 151, MATH 220

PHYS 252 Introduction to Waves, Optics, and Relativity 
4 cr
Third course in a three-course introductory physics sequence
which utilizes a calculus-based approach to study
the natural world. This course focuses on waves, optics,
and special relativity. Required Laboratory.
Prerequisite: PHYS 251, MATH 320

PHYS 301 Classical Mechanics 
3 cr
Studies particle motion in two- and three-dimensions,
systems of particles, rigid bodies, moving coordinates
systems, and Lagrange's equations.
Prerequisite: PHYS 252, MATH 330

PHYS 303 Electricity and Magnetism 
3 cr
Studies electrostatics, magnetostatics, electrodynamics,
Maxwell's equations and its aplications. Applications include
electromagnetic properties of matter, wave propagation,
radiating systems and special relativity.
Prerequisite: PHYS 252, MATH 330

PHYS 305 Electronics 
3 cr
Provides experience in building and analyzing analog and
digital circuits and becoming familiar with the standard
electronics lab equipment, such as oscilloscopes, power
supplies, function generators, and multimeters. Students
will build circuit containing resistors, capacitors, inductors,
transistors, and logic gates and analyze these circuits,
which entails calculating the theoretical output (voltage,
current, signal shape) and comparing these predictions to
the experimental output.
Prerequisite: PHYS 351

PHYS 351 Modern Physics 
4 cr
Studies the discovery of various physical phenomena
which led to the development of quantum mechanics and
introductory quantum mechanics. Required Laboratory.
Prerequisite: PHYS 252

PHYS 361 Mathematical Physics 
3 cr
Presents mathematical methods of use in the solution of
physical problems. Topics covered include linear equations:
vectors, matrices, and determinants, multiple integrals:
applications of integration, vector analysis, ordinary
and partial differential equations, coordinate transformations
and tensor analysis, and probability.
Prerequisite: MATH 320

PHYS 401 Advanced Physics Laboratory I 
3 cr
Studies laboratory techniques to supplement senior physics
courses or work on special projects with departmental approval.
Use of current computer technology is integral.
Prerequisite: PHYS 252

PHYS 402 Advanced Physics Laboratory II 
3 cr
Continues Physics 401. Use of current computer technology
is integral.
Prerequisite: PHYS 401

PHYS 403 Introduction to Particle Physics 
3 cr
Introduces the concepts necessary to understand the
structure of matter at the most fundamental level. Considers
matter in terms of its most elementary constituents,
and discusses the properties, classifications, and forces
which act on these particles. Discusses the relationship
between conservation laws and symmetries. The experimental
study of elementary particles is discussed throughout
the course. Concludes with a discussion of outstanding
questions in the field.
Prerequisite: PHYS 351

PHYS 404 Introduction to Solid State Physics 
3 cr
Provides an introduction to the physics of solids. Students
will characterize the properties of static (crystal structure)
and dynamic (lattice vibrations) arrangements of atoms.
Students will study electrons in solids and identify key
features distinguishing metals, insulators and semiconductors.
Semiconductor devises and, time permitting,
biological systems will also be discussed.
Prerequisite: PHYS 351

PHYS 460 Statistical Thermodynamics 
3 cr
Studies statistical techniques applied to physical phenomena.
Topics include kinetic theory of gasses, classical
thermodynamics and quantum statistical physics.
Prerequisite: PHYS 252

PHYS 471 Quantum Mechanics 
3 cr
Studies inadequacies of classical mechanics and explores
ways of describing nature at the atomic level. Topics include
the Schrodinger equation and its solutions for various
simple systems, expectation values, operator formalism
and matrix representation.
Prerequisite: PHYS 351

PHYS 499 Teaching Assistantship in Physics
1 to 3 cr
Provides the opportunity for a student to assist in the
preparation and/or implementation of a physics course.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PHYS 500 Directed Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and frequent
conferences with the advisor are required.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

PHYS 510 Independent Research
1 to 3 cr
Participation in research in physics under the direction of
a member of the physics faculty in a specific area.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PHYS 540 Physics Internship
3 to 15 cr
Offers the upper-level physics major an opportunity to
practice physics in an appropriate professional situation.
The student will work with a faculty sponsor and an offcampus
supervisor in gaining experience significant to the
major.
Prerequisite: Department approval, junior/senior status

PHYS 580 Special Topics in Physics
1 to 4 cr
Studies concepts, problems, issues, topics or themes that
are important in the field of physics. Special topic seminars
may explore a variety of topics including but not
limited to: physics for educators, solid state physics, robotics
and engineering applications. Lab may be required
depending on topic.
Prerequisite: Department approval

POSC 201 U.S. Government and Public Policy 
3 cr
Introduces the major institutions of national and state government
and the discipline of political science. Through
interdisciplinary study, students will develop an understanding
of political behavior and the public policy processes
in the United States. Course attributes: CSS, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

POSC 202 Comparative Government and Public Policy 
3 cr
Provides a comparative introduction to world political cultures
and the discipline of political science. Through an
interdisciplinary study of various nation-states, students
will develop an understanding of political behavior and
public policy processes. Course attributes: CSS, ENVI.
Prerequisite: None

POSC 205 International Relations 
3 cr
Studies relations among nation-states. Analyzes the
nature of world political systems by examining concepts
of power, political economy, decision-making, nongovernmental
actors, international organizations, and political
ideology. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: None

POSC 210 Political Science Research and Methods 
3 cr
Provides students with an understanding of various theoretical
approaches to the study of politics and the public
policy processes, as well as developing skills in social science
quantitative and qualitative research methods.
Prerequisite: None

POSC 300 Politics and the News Media in America 
3 cr
Examines politics in 20th century America with an eye to
the role and responsibility of the news media in, and the
relationship of the press to, politics. Analyzes the print
and electronic media and current political campaigns, as
well as how politics and the news media have been portrayed
in film.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

POSC 304 Constitutional Law 
3 cr
Analyzes constitutional law with special emphasis on civil
liberties and civil rights. Legal issues will be examined in
the light of relevant social and political conditions. Course
attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

POSC 315 Topics in Political Science 
3 cr
Focuses on political science and government in national,
regional, and international organizations throughout
the world. Topics include: The United Nations; State and
Local Government; Politics and Economics of the Pacific
Rim; Vietnam.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

POSC 316 Topics in Public Policy 
3 cr
Focuses on selected public policies and the policy process
in the United States and/or state governments.
Prerequisite: POSC 201, POSC 202

POSC 331 Africa 
3 cr
Examines the nation-building issues facing the countries
of Africa. Students will study the African triple heritage
(indigenous culture, Islam, and Western colonialism) to
gain insights into contemporary political and economic
issues. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

POSC 340 Inequality and Social Policy 
3 cr
Examines social welfare policies and programs from the
New Deal to the present analyzing their economic, cultural,
historic and political roots. Emphasis on selected
issues such as poverty and inequality, healthcare, abuse
and neglect, daycare and parental leave. Examines social
welfare policies as expressions of American values and
political processes and compares American programs to
those of other industrialized countries. Special attention
paid to the experience of social program recipients. Course
attributes: C&FS, SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or any Self & Society course

POSC 401 Seminar: Problems in Political Science 
3 cr
Explores in depth a particular problem, concept, issue,
topic, or theme in political science. Topics include: The
American Presidency; The Public Policy Process; The
American Political Tradition.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status and courses in political science or a related discipline at the 300 level

POSC 402 Seminar: Problems in Political Science
3 cr
Explores in depth a particular problem, concept, issue,
topic, or theme in political science. Topics include: The
American Presidency; The Public Policy Process; The
American Political Tradition.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status and courses in political science or a related discipline at the 300 level

POSC 403 Seminar in Public Policy 
3 cr
Explores the public policy process in the United States
and/or those of political systems in other nations. Topics
include: U.S. Public Policy; Comparative Public Policy;
State and Local Government.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status and courses in political science or related discipline at the 300 level

POSC 450 Career and ePortfolio Workshop 
1 cr
Provides senior students majoring in Political Science and
Public Policy with an opportunity and framework to reflect
on their past work in the major and the wider liberal
arts as well as look foward to opportunities and challenges
after graduation. Completion of an ePortfolio will be an
essential component. Students will work with the instructor,
career service professionals, and alumni to understand
career and graduate school possibilities and prepare strategies
for success.
Prerequisite: PSPP major, senior status

POSC 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who desire to read widely in
a given area or to study a specific topic in depth. Written
reports and frequent conferences with the advisor are
required.
Prerequisite: Department approval

POSC 510 Teaching Assistant in Political Science 
3 cr
Offers highly qualified majors in history or minors in
political science an opportunity to assist an instructor in
the conduct of an introductory course. The student may
be held responsible for grading papers, conducting classes
and review sessions, etc.
Prerequisite: Department approval

POSC 540 Internship in Political Science
3 to 15 cr
Qualified students may be placed as interns in state, local
and national government agencies, law offices, museums,
schools or businesses.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

PSYC 100 Introduction to Psychology 
3 cr
Introduces students to the science of psychology, presenting
the basic principles of mental processes and behavior.
To introduce the process of empirical investigation, research
participation is required. Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: None

PSYC 208 Applied Developmental Psychology 
3 cr
Examines developmental theory and research from an
applied perspective. Physical, cognitive, language, social
and emotional development from early childhood through
adolescence will be covered with an emphasis on application.
(Students cannot receive credit for both PSYC 208
and PSYC 210). Course attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

PSYC 210 Developmental Psychology 
3 cr
Examines the development of the child through adolescence,
including neonatal and prenatal development. Major
theories of physical, cognitive and social development
are discussed. The research methods and controversial
issues in developmental psychology are emphasized. (Students
cannot receive credit for both PSYC 210 and PSYC
208). Course attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100 or SOCI 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

PSYC 230 Social Psychology 
3 cr
Examines human social behavior emphasizing environmental
and situational factors. Theoretical and applied
issues are considered within selected topics. (Psychology
majors cannot receive core Self & Society credit for PSYC
230). Course attributes: CSS, LDRS.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100 or SOCI 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

PSYC 270 Abnormal Psychology 
3 cr
Examines theoretical perspectives of maladaptative behavior
and the concepts of stress, coping, normality and
abnormality. Emphasis on assessment, diagnosis, and
treatment of psychological disorders of childhood, adolescence
and adulthood.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

PSYC 290 Psychological Research and Statistics I 
4 cr
Introduces the nature of empirical investigation in psychology
and the role of data analysis in psychological
research. Students learn the value of research methodology
as applied to the field of psychology with a focus on
concepts and interpretation of basic research design and
statistical analysis. A weekly lab introduces data analysis
software applications.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100 and Tier I Quantitative Reasoning

PSYC 291 Psychological Research and Statistics II 
4 cr
A continuation of PSYC 290, extending the nature of
empirical investigation in psychology to specific research
designs and statistical analyses. The course focuses on
concepts, interpretation and applications of methodology
and data analysis used by psychologists, including topics
of ethics and APA style. Mastery of course material will be
demonstrated by a completed research paper; weekly lab
extends students' knowledge of statistical analysis software
applications.
Prerequisite: Grade of C or better in PSYC 290

PSYC 299 Sophomore Seminar in Psychology 
3 cr
Introduces and explores empirical research, theory and
applications in selected areas of psychology. Emphasis will
be placed on library research and class discussion. Critical
reading and analysis skills will be assessed through several
papers and presentations.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100

PSYC 310 Cognitive Psychology 
3 cr
Studies knowing, learning, thinking and language. Topics
include theories of cognition, language, attention, problem
solving, memory, consciousness and creative thinking.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 316 Behavior Analysis 
3 cr
Introduces the field of behavior analysis, examining
behavior analytic history, philosophy, concepts and principles.
Techniques and strategies inside and outside the
laboratory will be discussed in detail. Students learn the
basics of data-based approaches to behavior treatment.
Concepts will be illustrated during discussion of a wide
variety of behavior problems associated with developmental
disabilities, substance abuse, physical fitness and
academic delays.
Prerequisite: PSYC 100

PSYC 325 Environmental Psychology 
3 cr
Examines the relationship between the natural and built
physical environment from a multidisciplinary perspective.
Focuses on the behavioral effects of spatial design,
noise, privacy, personal space and climate.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC or SOCI course or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 331 Biological Psychology 
3 cr
Examines the relationships between brain function and
behavior using concepts from psychology and biology.
Topics include motivation and emotion, learning and
memory, sensory systems and perception, language disabilities
and mental disorders.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 332 Drugs and Human Behavior 
3 cr
Examines the use and abuse of drugs from biological,
psychological and cultural points of view. Addresses contemporary
efforts in education, prevention and treatment
of abuse.
Prerequisite: One 200-level PSYC, BIOL, or CHEM course

PSYC 335 Organizational Psychology 
3 cr
Emphasizes the application of psychological theory and
techniques to the management of behavior in structured
organizations. Focuses on the concepts of motivation,
leadership, and interpersonal and group process. Course
attributes: LDRS.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC or SOCI or BADM course or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 340 Psychology of Children with Special Needs 
3 cr
Examines the special needs of children, the methods used
to determine these needs, and the procedures used to meet
these needs. Course attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: PSYC 208 or PSYC 210

PSYC 350 Theories of Personality 
3 cr
Examines classical and contemporary approaches to
personality theory. Emphasizes application and empirical
support for theoretical positions.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 355 Human Sexuality 
3 cr
Examines the field of human sexuality from psychological,
biological and sociological perspectives. In covering a
wide range of contemporary topics, emphasis is on empirical,
verifiable scientific information. Course attributes:
C&FS, WMST.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC or SOCI course or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 356 Psychology of Gender 
3 cr
Focuses on the similarities and differences between males
and females, masculinity and femininity. Explores the
origins and maintenance of gender stereotypes and their
consequences. Course attributes: C&FS, WMST.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC or SOCI course or completion of Tier II Self &Society domain

PSYC 357 Psychology of Women 
3 cr
Explores psychological and sociocultural issues concerning
women in our society. Women's experiences will be
covered in areas that are stereotypically thought of as
male-oriented as well as those more exclusive to females.
Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC or SOCI course or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 360 Measurement and Assessment 
4 cr
Introduces concepts related to psychological testing and
measurement. Topics will include measurement theory,
psychometric principles, ethics of measurement and assessment,
and measurement design in different settings
(government, clinical, educational, and/or industrial/
organizational). Mastery of course material determined
by design, administration, interpretation and critique of
assessments. Content identified by subtitle. This course is
repeatable for a maximum of 
8 crs. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 369 Forensic Psychology 
3 cr
Explores psychological aspects of human behavior and
sociocultural issues as applied to law and the legal system.
The role of forensic psychology in the production and application
of psychological knowledge will be discussed by
examining a number of social issues. Although the focus
is primarily on criminal and civil cases, a broad perspective
of forensic psychology will be covered, allowing the
work of social scientists, jurists, clinicians and judges to be
viewed in a systemic context.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 370 Human Communication and Perception 
3 cr
Presents an information processing approach to how we
perceive and communicate about the world. Also examines
our acquisition and use of language, as well as societal
influences on perception and thought.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 375 Health Psychology 
3 cr
Studies health and illness within the conceptual and
methodological context of psychology, epidemiology, development,
neuroscience and behavioral medicine. Examines
and contrasts medical, psychological, and alternative
models of disease and wellness.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC course or completion of Tier II Science & Technology domain

PSYC 376 Sport Psychology 
3 cr
Introduces students to the current research and theoretical
perspectives related to various psychological and psychosocial
components of exercise, sport participation and
competition. Personality, motivation, social facilitation,
anxiety, aggression and other factors that influence individuals
and teams/groups are examined.
Prerequisite: Completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 380 Educational Psychology 
3 cr
Studies the conditions and theories of classroom learning.
Scope: instructional objectives, task analysis, conditioning,
concept and rule learning, problem solving, memory,
transfer and motivation. Course attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: 200 level PSYC course, CCSS 269, or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 386 Adolescent Development 
3 cr
Examines the cognitive, social, emotional and physical
development of the adolescent from a psychological
perspective. Psychological and social problems that may
arise during adolescence are discussed. Course attributes:
C&FS.
Prerequisite: One 200-level PSYC course

PSYC 387 Childhood Disorders 
3 cr
Examines the etiology and clinical characteristics of
behavioral disorders in infancy through adolescence,
including emotional disturbances, anxiety and conduct
disorders, mental retardation and learning disabilities.
Emphasis on theoretical perspectives, research, assesment,
early intervention and prevention. Course attributes:
C&FS.
Prerequisite: PSYC 208 or PSYC 210

PSYC 388 Adulthood and Aging 
3 cr
Examines cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development
during adulthood from a psychological perspective.
Studies the impact of an increased life span on
society and concludes with a psychological examination of
death and dying.
Prerequisite: One 200-level PSYC course

PSYC 390 Research Design and Analysis 
4 cr
Focuses on advanced methodology, data analysis and interpretation
in psychological research. A research project
is required. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 391 Research Assistant in Psychology
1 to 3 cr
Provides opportunities for students to assist faculty in
conducting empirical research. Particular responsibilities
may include data collection, statistical analyses and other
activities involved in planning and conducting research in
psychology. Amount of credit will be determined by the
faculty supervisor in consultation with the student. The
course may be repeated up to a maximum of six credits
with all grades assigned as pass/fail. Enrollment requires
permission of the instructor.
Prerequisite: 200-level PSYC course, instructor approval

PSYC 397 Research Seminar: 
4 cr
Applies research design and practice to selected problems.
Includes literature review, deriving and empirically testing
hypotheses. Requirements involve preparation of laboratory
and other research materials, recruitment of participants
and collection, analysis, and interpretation of resulting
data. Culminates in preparation and submission of a
complete report of the research project. Content identified
by subtitle. This course is repeatable for a maximum of 8
crs. Required laboratory.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

PSYC 399 Honors Seminar in Psychology 
3 cr
Surveys and critically examines selected areas and issues
in psychology. Emphasizes multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary
approaches to the topics selected for study.
Designed for junior and senior majors intending graduate
study in psychology, the seminar requires students to
develop a program of reading, give oral presentations and
complete a literature review paper.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291

PSYC 410 History of Psychology 
3 cr
Examines the development of psychology as a science, an
academic discipline, and a profession. Includes a comparative
analysis of major contemporary theories in psychology.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291 and completion of 9 upper-divison credits in psychology

PSYC 416 Research in Behavior Analysis 
3 cr
Participate in the design, implementation, analysis and
dissemination of empirical research. Students will examine
the strategies and rationale underlying within-subject
designs through exposure to recently published articles
from the behavior analytic literature. The relationship between
experimental and applied research will be examined
closely. All students will prepare an APA-style manuscript
describing their research project.
Prerequisite: PSYC 316

PSYC 440 Counseling Methods in Psychology 
3 cr
Studies techniques applicable in the helping services and
counseling. Theories of counseling and basic psychotherapy
will be reviewed. Experiential sessions will demonstrate
established theories.
Prerequisite: PSYC 270

PSYC 460 Human Behavior in Cross-Cultural Perspective
3 cr
Examines similarities and differences in human behavior
across cultural contexts. Includes study of socialization
practices, interpersonal behavior patterns, personality
variables and cognitive processes.
Prerequisite: 200-level PSYC or SOCI course or completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 470 Teaching Assistant in Psychology
1 to 3 cr
Provides the opportunity for students to assist a faculty
member in the preparation and implementation of a
psychology course. Particular responsibilities may include
providing support with class activities and assisting
students enrolled in the course. Amount of credit will be
determined by the faculty supervisor in consultation with
the student. The course is graded pass/fail. Enrollment
requires permission of instructor.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

PSYC 495 Special Topics in Psychology 
3 cr
Explores one or more special topics in psychology. Topic
will be specified when the course is offered.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status and completion of Tier II Self & Society domain

PSYC 496 Research in Psychology 
3 cr
For junior and senior psychology majors who choose to
conduct psychological research independently in a specific
area. The research will be carried out under the direction
of the faculty supervisor and will require a substantive
scholarly report of the research. The course may be repeated
for credit with the permission of a faculty member.
The course is graded pass/fail. Enrollment requires permission
of the instructor.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

PSYC 499 Advanced Seminar in Psychology 
3 cr
An intensive examination of a selected topic in psychology.
Mastery of the seminar material will be assessed by the
completion of an APA-style paper.
Prerequisite: PSYC 291 and completion of 9 upper-division credits in PSYC

PSYC 500 Independent Study
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth. Written reports and
frequent conferences with the advisor are required. Enrollment
requires individual application and permission of
the department.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

PSYC 516 Functional Assessment and Intervention 
3 cr
Receive an intensive overview of behavior assessment
strategies designed to determine the environmental factors
that influence behavior problems. Examples from recent
literature will be examined in depth with a focus on applications
to educational and other settings. All students
will conduct three simulated functional assessments and
behavior plans.
Prerequisite: PSYC 316

PSYC 540 Psychology Internship
3 to 15 cr
Provides opportunities in a variety of public agencies and
private organizations to gain practical experience and to
develop skills in applying psychological theories, principles,
methods and techniques to the management of
problems of human development, thought, adjustment and
behavior. Enrollment requires individual application and
permission of the department.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

PSYC 550 Senior Thesis 
3 cr
Requires completion of a formal thesis on a significant
topic in psychology. Intended for senior psychology majors,
a literature review and proposal, along with approval
of two members of the psychology faculty, is required
prior to enrollment in the thesis course.
Prerequisite: Senior PSYC major, department approval

PSYC 552 NECC: Advanced Learning 
3 cr
Provides an overview of modern behavior analytic concepts
and terminology. Beginning with an examination
of the history and assumptions of modern behaviorism,
students will learn the competencies of behavior analysis
in relation to working with children with special needs.
Requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-NECC
cooperative program.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PSYC 553 NECC: Functional Analysis and Treatment of Behavior Disorders 
3 cr
Covers the goals and strategies of behavioral assessment.
Students will learn indirect, descriptive and experimental
assessments. All students will perform a descriptive
funcational analysis and an analog functional analysis.
Required acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-NECC
cooperative program.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PSYC 554 NECC: Systematic Inquiry in Applied Research 
3 cr
Students will read and discuss recently published articles
in the field of Applied Behavior Analysis. Class sections
will focus on student presentations and discussion of articles
selected by the instructor. The goal is to further student
knowledge and inquiry in applications of empirical
research in applied behavior analysis. Requires acceptance
and enrollment in MCLA-NECC cooperative program.
Prerequisite: Department approval

PSYC 555 NECC: Seminar and Practica in Clinical Practice 
9 cr
Involves working with special needs children under the
mentorship of a faculty advisor. Students complete readings
and research related to their classroom experiences
and write a paper on a topic chosen by the student and
approved by the instructor. Each student is assigned
teaching responsibilities under the supervision of a faculty
mentor. Students participate in a weekly seminar designed
to raise issues and discuss topics relevant to the practicum
experience and assigned readings.
Prerequisite: Department approval, requires acceptance and enrollment in MCLA-NECC Cooperative Program

SKIL 096 Mathematics For College 
3 cr
Provides the means for students to develop mathematical
literacy by reviewing computational skills and selected algebraic
functions. Students will acquire quantitative sense
and confidence to prepare for core curriculum or foundation
courses in quantitative skills. Course includes initial
diagnostic/placement test, which determines specific
learning units to be covered. The course is individualized
and runs with small group, individual and large group
instruction.
Prerequisite: Placement based on college testing, SAT scores, faculty or admissions referral

SKIL 097 Writing For College 
3 cr
Emphasizes components of clear written communication.
Prepares students for college level writing requirements.
Includes lectures, writing activities, and group and individual
discussions.
Prerequisite: Placement based on college testing, SAT scores, faculty or admissions referral

SOCI 100 Introduction to Sociology 
3 cr
Introduces the history, major concepts, and methods of sociology.
Examines elements of social organization, sociological
analysis of groups and relationships between major
institutions of society. Emphasizes the idea of the sociological
imagination and its application to contemporary
issues. Course attributes: CRCU, CSS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: None

SOCI 201 Social Problems 
3 cr
Studies problems and disorganization in modern industrial
society such as: poverty, racism, sexism, environmental
pollution, militarism and family issues. Course attributes:
CRCU, CSS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

SOCI 210 Families 
3 cr
Explores contemporary American families (the forms
they take, the functions they serve, the problems they
face) within the context of families of other historical time
periods, and other cultures. Presents an interdisciplinary
examination of such topics as: gender roles, marriage, divorce
and blended families, nonmarital lifestyles, parenting,
family policy and technology's impact on family life.
Course attributes: C&FS, CSS, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or a 100-level Self & Society course

SOCI 282 Social Constructions of Deviance 
3 cr
Analyzes social definitions of and responses to deviance,
as well as explanations of its causes. Examines drug and
alcohol use and abuse, mental illness, sexual and gender
differences, and other issues frequently considered deviant.
Course attributes: CSS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 305 Latinas in US Society 
3 cr
Addresses the modern lives of young Latinas in the U.S.
Topics to be discussed include, but are not limited to,
family, friendship, romance, appearance, identity, and
socioeconomic status. In particular, the subject of "voice"
or "voz" and the strength Latinas gain in society through
expressing their opinions and giving testimony will be explored.
The subject of the commodification and national/
intercultural expectations of the body of Latinas will also
be given much attention. Course attributes: C&FS, CRCU,
SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 312 Sociological Theory 
3 cr
Explores the meaning of theory and its utility in the sociological
enterprise. Examines foundational works of major
classical theorists (Comte, Marx, Weber, Durkheim) and
introduces contemporary perspectives such as symbolic
interactionist, critical, feminist, and postmodern theories.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and two SOCI electives

SOCI 315 Religion in Modern Society 
3 cr
Studies religion as a social phenomenon in all its diversity
in American culture. Emphasis will be placed on understanding
religion in a post-modern world. Examines how
sociology, distinct from theology, psychology and common
sense approaches religion. Explores how religion is
socially, culturally and historically constructed.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 316 Sociology of Sport 
3 cr
Analyzes sport as a microcosm of society. Specifically
focuses on American sport from youth through the professional
levels. Studies sport and the following: socialization,
business, mass media, ethical dilemmas, race, gender,
structural inequality and secular religion. Examines the
sociological reasons why contemporary sport is organized
and functions as it does.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 321 Race and Ethnic Relations 
3 cr
Explores the intersection of race, ethnicity, and issues of
diversity in the U.S. and beyond. Begins by establishing
what race and ethnicity are in the U.S. Course topics
related to race will include family relations, friendships,
urban life, gender, socioeconomic status, stereotypes, community,
and space/location. Occurrence of racism and related
inequality in its various forms is a central discussion
thread throughout the course. Course attributes: CRCU,
SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 322 Population 
3 cr
Studies human populations in terms of size, composition,
and distribution, and the causes and social consequences
of these three characteristics. Examines issues of population
policy at community, national, and international
levels. Course attributes: ENVI.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 325 Contemporary Social Issues Through Film 
3 cr
Examines American society through the medium of film.
Students learn how to analyze movies sociologically, to
place them in their historical and cultural context, both as
shaping forces in society and as reflections of underlying
social issues.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 331 Methods of Social Research 
3 cr
Examines sociological methods commonly used in the
study of the social world, as well as ethical and political
issues related to the research process. Explores the various
steps of research design, data collection (questionnaire
construction, interviewing, observation, content analysis)
and data analysis. May include an independently designed
research project.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and two SOCI electives

SOCI 335 Health and Aging 
3 cr
Provides an overview of issues related to health and aging
at the personal and societal levels. Discusses myths and
stereotypes of aging and the concept of successful aging.
Examines life expectancy, chronic disease, and their
impact on an aging society.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 336 Death and Dying 
3 cr
Analyzes social and cultural meanings of this final stage
of development, the process of dying, death rituals, near
death experiences, grief/bereavement, caring relationships,
and ethical, legal, and medical issues. Examines how
social change affects social practices related to death and
dying.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 337 Aging and the Life Course 
3 cr
Focuses on understanding the changes in social roles and
relationships that occur as people move through their life
course. Examines social forces that influence the individual
aging experience. Explores the relationship between
quality of life in old age and in individual's cumulative
life experiences. Analyzes social, psychological, physical,
medical, and economic aspects of an aging society. Course
attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100, junior/senior status

SOCI 351 Criminology 
3 cr
Studies the nature of crime and theories of criminal
behavior; operation of courts, police systems and correctional
institutions; probation, parole and crime prevention.
Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 352 Juvenile Delinquency 
3 cr
Analyzes patterns of delinquent behavior in children and
adolescents; institutional and community efforts aimed at
control, treatment and rehabilitation. Course attributes:
C&FS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 355 Law and Society 
3 cr
Analyzes the development of law in complex societies, its
functions and the social forces that influence rule-making
and rule-sanctioning institutions. Examines the workings
of legislatures, courts and executive administrative agencies,
as well as the role performance of legal practitioners
- legislators, judges and lawyers. Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOCI 360 Women, Movies, and MTV (music television)
3 cr
Addresses sociological and social work accounts of the
lived experiences of women in American society including
special populations such as survivors of rape, spouse
abuse, incest and mental illness. Compares these accounts
to historical and cultural depictions of women in movies
and MTV. Examines the images of women in film as a
powerful form of cultural conditioning. Course attributes:
C&FS, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or PSYC 100 or any Self & Society course

SOCI 395 Special Topics in Sociology 
3 cr
A course or seminar for students who have taken a substantial
number of sociology courses. Such courses or
seminars may explore any of a variety of topics concerning
social groups, social institutions, social interaction patterns,
or any of the vast array of topic areas dealt with by
sociologists.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and additional prereqs to be announced

SOCI 402 Genocide 
3 cr
Examines legal definition and cases of genocide to understand
structural preconditions and effective prevention
strategies. Course attributes: CRCU, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 403 Social Movements 
3 cr
Introduces students to major social movements of the 20th
Century in the U.S. and the variety of state responses to
them. Examines political, social, economic conditions
that gave rise to movements and the ways in which these
movements have succeeded and failed. Explores why
people join movements and the tactics they use to achieve
movement goals. Additional focus on how art (poetry,
literature, performance art, murals, photography) can
function as a form of political protest. Course attributes:
LDRS, SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 410 Sociology of Education 
3 cr
Uses a race, class, gender analytic structure to investigate
social inequalities in education. School choice, urban
schools, school sports, space/location, and friendship are
some of the areas that will be explored. Family involvement
in school choice, tracking, and magnet programs
will also be considered. Grade school through college
educational outcomes will be addressed. Course attributes:
C&FS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 415 Sociology of Happiness 
3 cr
Explores attainment and production of human happiness
at individual and societal levels. It examines happiness
theory and research from sociology, philosophy, anthropology,
social psychology, health, political science, economics,
public policy, and other fields to provide a comprehensive
understanding of wellbeing and its multiple
sources.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 425 Sociology of Childhood 
3 cr
Explores the sociology of childhood. The course will begin
by establishing definitions for the child and the sociology
of childhood. Methodological issues surrounding
children as research subjects, meaning making, sense of
belonging, inequality, and culture in the worlds of childhood
will be addressed. There will be a special focus in
this course on the existence and displays of agency and
interpretive reproduction in children's lives. Course attributes:
C&FS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 432 Doing Sociology: Workshop in Research Methods 
4 cr
Provides experience in designing and carrying out an
applied community or institutional research project.
Involves practical application of research techniques and
includes: a review of the literature, questionnaire construction,
interviewing/data gathering, coding and data
analysis.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100, SOCI 331, and department approval

SOCI 441 Social Stratification 
3 cr
Explores and analyzes stratification systems, theories of
stratification, social mobility, types of inequality, methods
of measuring inequality, and the impact upon life style
and personality. Course attributes: SOCJ.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and junior/senior status or instructor approval

SOCI 499 Teaching Assistant in Sociology 
3 cr
Supervised academic class presentation(s), assistance with
study sessions and tutorials, attendance at all classes, final
paper and other duties negotiated with course instructor.
Must have completed a minimum of four (4) courses in
the discipline, have a 3.0 overall GPA or better, and a B+
or better in the course. This course can be taken for either
pass/fail or traditional letter grading. This course requires
approval of the department prior to enrollment.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

SOCI 500 Independent Study - Sociology
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth under the direction of a
sociologist. Requires written reports and frequent conferences
with the advisor.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

SOCI 501 Research Assistant
1 to 3 cr
Students will assist faculty member in conducting original
quantitative and/or qualitative research projects. The
responsibilities may include collecting archival, ethnographic,
interview, or focus group data, working with data
sets, or other research activities. This course is repeatable
for a maximum of 
6 credits.
Prerequisite: SOCI 331, junior/senior status, instructor approval

SOCI 505 ProSeminar 
3 cr
Prepares students for the start of potential graduate
studies in the social sciences or a related discipline. The
seminar will focus on and facilitate student exploration of
graduate education and training opportunities including
such topics as: the graduate school/program research and
selection process; crafting curriculum vitae and/or business
resumes; constructing a statement of purpose; and
editing writing samples for graduate applications.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

SOCI 540 Sociology Internship
3 to 15 cr
Placement in public or private organizations that apply
knowledge and approaches from the social sciences. Internships
are available in such areas as community development,
the court system, legal aid offices, labor unions,
personnel departments, and governmental bureaus.
Internships are awarded from 3-
15 credits per semester,
depending on the extent of student involvement.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, six semester hours of related coursework at the 200-level or above, department approval

SOWK 241 Introduction to Social Work 
3 cr
Studies the history of social welfare in America, major
current social welfare programs, the profession of social
work, social service settings and the social work methods
of casework, group work and community organization.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100

SOWK 340 Inequality and Social Policy 
3 cr
Examines social welfare policies and programs from the
New Deal to the present analyzing their economic, cultural,
historic and political roots. Emphasis on selected
issues such as poverty and inequality, health care, abuse
and neglect, day care and parental leave. Examines social
welfare policies as expressions of American values and
political processes and compares American programs to
those of other industrialized countries. Special attention
paid to the experience of social program recipients. Course
attributes: C&FS, SOCJ, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or any Self & Society course

SOWK 348 Social Work Skills 
3 cr
Focuses on fundamental social work skills such as establishing
a helping relationship, interviewing, listening,
feedback, summarizing, and problem solving. Explores
contracting, professional values, termination work, and
social worker roles of mediator, advocate, outreach worker,
social broker, and activist.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or PSYC 100

SOWK 355 Community Organizing 
3 cr
Explores community organizing as a means of empowering
citizens to make successful changes in the social
issues impacting their communities. Involves the study of
theories of community organizing and social change and
participation in projects offering a chance to learn about
community organizing through practice. Course attributes:
LDRS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100, recommended SOWK 348

SOWK 380 Women and Health 
3 cr
Focuses on issues related to women's health status in the
U.S. and around the world. Examines topics such as:
female sexuality, reproduction and fertility management,
eating disorders, victims of sexual abuse, women as health
care practitioners, the impact of modern medical technology,
and the influence of the women's health movement in
encouraging self-responsibility. Course attributes: C&FS,
WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or ANTH 130 or ANTH 140

SOWK 382 Social Work Administration 
3 cr
Studies the role of administrators and other staff in agency
organization and operation; interaction of agency, community
and consumer; boards of directors; processes of
planning, budgeting, policy determiniation, personnel and
program management, staff development, organizational
and interpersonal conflict, and managerial burnout.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or PSYC 100 or any Self & Society course

SOWK 395 Special Topics in Social Work 
3 cr
A course or seminar for students who have taken a substantial
number of social work/social service courses.
Such courses or seminars may explore any of a variety of
topics concerning casework, group work, community organization,
social planning, social policy or other courses
which deal with techniques or theory related to social
work/social service practice.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 and additional prereqs to be announced

SOWK 442 Social Casework 
3 cr
Examines casework practice theory and methodologies
as applied in a variety of social service settings. Focuses
on the psychosocial framework of study, assessment and
treatment of client problems. Explores casework with special
populations such as children, teenagers, and depressed
and suicidal clients.
Prerequisite: SOWK 348

SOWK 443 Casework with Couples and Families 
3 cr
Explores clinical practice with family problems. Examines
the ways in which environmental, social, economic,
psychological and institutional pressures help create and
exacerbate family dysfunction, and the integration of this
understanding into skilled intervention with families.
Course attributes: C&FS, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOWK 348

SOWK 452 Social Work with Juvenile Delinquents 
3 cr
Examines research and practice in the prevention and
treatment of juvenile delinquency. A review of perspectives
on delinquency causation is followed by the presentation
of current intervention methods and direct exposure
via field trips, speakers and videotapes to those methods in
practice settings. Course attributes: C&FS.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or PSYC 100

SOWK 475 Family Violence 
3 cr
Examines violence within contemporary American
families through the lenses of gender, culture, and age.
Emphasis is placed on the physical and sexual abuse of
women and children. We explore theory, research, and
solutions from the fields of social work, sociology, psychology,
and feminism. Course attributes: C&FS, WMST.
Prerequisite: SOCI 100 or PSYC 100 and junior/senior status, or instructor approval

SOWK 499 Teaching Assistant in Social Work 
3 cr
Supervised academic class presentation(s), assistance with
study sessions and tutorials, attendance at all classes, final
paper and other duties negotiated with course instructor.
Must have completed a minimum of four (4) courses in
the discipline, have a 3.0 overall GPA or better, and a B+
or better in the course. This course can be taken for either
pass/fail or traditional letter grading. The course requires
department approval prior to enrollment.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status

SOWK 500 Independent Study-Social Work
1 to 3 cr
Open to juniors and seniors who wish to read in a given
area or to study a topic in depth under the direction of a
social worker. Requires written reports and frequent conferences
with the advisor.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, department approval

SOWK 501 Research Assistant
1 to 3 cr
Students will assist faculty member in conducting original
quantitative and/or qualitative research projects. The
responsibilities may include collecting archival, ethnographic,
interview, or focus group data, working with data
sets, or other research activities. This course is repeatable
for a maximum of 6 credits.
Prerequisite: SOCI 331, junior/senior status, instructor approval

SOWK 540 Social Work Internship
3 to 15 cr
Placement in social or human service agencies. Internships
are available in counseling, advocacy, outreach,
organizing, planning and the administering of social programs.
Students gain field experience under supervision
from both agency and departmental personnel. Internships
are awarded 3-15 credits per semester, depending
upon the extent of student involvement.
Prerequisite: Junior/senior status, six semester hours of related courses at the 200-level or above, department approval

SPAN 101 Elementary Spanish I 
3 cr
Introduces spoken and written Spanish, emphasizing comprehension
and communication. Classroom time devoted
primarily to listening, speaking and some reading. Vocabulary
presented and illustrated in meaningful contexts.
Lab assignments provide practice in writing, as well as additional
opportunities to hear and read Spanish. First half
of a one-year course; intended for those who have no prior
experience with Spanish. Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisite: None

SPAN 102 Elementary Spanish II 
3 cr
Reviews first-semester Spanish and continues the comprehension
and oral communication begun in Spanish 101.
Intended for those who have already experienced a basic
Spanish course. Conducted in Spanish. Course attributes:
CLA.
Prerequisite: SPAN 101 or equivalent

SPAN 201 Intermediate Spanish I 
3 cr
Reviews first-year college Spanish (or high-school equivalent)
with a view toward building competence and confidence
in students who have been exposed to the basics of
the language. Exploration of selected themes in modern
Hispanic society, as well as intensive exercises in the oral
and written language. Readings, discussions and brief essays
on topics related to Hispanic culture. Conducted in
Spanish.
Prerequisite: SPAN 102 or department approval

SPAN 202 Intermediate Spanish II 
3 cr
Continues Spanish 201. Additionally, through the reading
of varied texts of wide appeal and interest, students
become acquainted with the literature and life experiences
of Spanish-speaking peoples. Exploring such elements as
the literary content, themes, figures of speech and tone of
a text, students are assigned written work of a descriptive
or interpretive nature based on such textual aspects of the
works studied and discussed. Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisite: SPAN 201 or equivalent

SPAN 300 Spanish Conversation 
3 cr
Focuses on the practice of spoken language. Students perfect
oral communication skills by practicing idioms and
conversational courtesies and improve understanding of
spoken language.
Prerequisite: SPAN 202 or equivalent

SPAN 301 Advanced Spanish Grammar and Composition 
3 cr
Reinforces students' ability to express themselves in
Spanish, both verbally and in writing. Develops students'
awareness of complex syntactical structures, and emphasizes
skills in composition and advanced reading comprehension.
Conducted in Spanish.
Prerequisite: SPAN 202 or equivalent

SPAN 310 Hispanic Civilization 
3 cr
Provides a general survey of the history of Spain in the
broader context of Mediterranean civilization through
the colonial period. Looks at the present-day experience
of Hispanics in the United States in the light of the past.
Readings, discussions, written summaries, oral reports,
brief essays and written examinations. Conducted in
Spanish. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: SPAN 202 or equivalent

SPAN 370 Hispanic Literature in Context 
3 cr
Discusses the artistic implications of Iberoamerican literature
and develops basic techniques of critical reading and
textual analysis. Also reviews literary notions and genres.
The reading selection is aimed at fostering class discussion,
and provides additional insight for the examination
and the interpretation of texts. Conducted in Spanish.
Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: SPAN 202 or equivalent

SPAN 390 Special Topics in Hispanic Literature and Film 
3 cr
Studies a specific aspect or period of Spanish literature
and/or film in depth. Designed to provide advanced work
in analysis, interpretation and research in selected areas
of study. Course topic is identified by subtitle and may include
areas such as Spanish and Latin American Cinema,
Postmodernism in the Hispanic World and Contemporary
Spanish Poetry. This course is conducted in Spanish (unless
otherwise noted) and may be repeated when different
topics are offered. Course attributes: CRCU.
Prerequisite: SPAN 300, SPAN 301

THEA 110 Introduction to Stagecrafts 
3 cr
Provides a foundation in the practice of technical theatre,
preparation for work in scenery, lighting, and costumes.
Class projects are designed to reinforce specific technical
skills discussed and demonstrated in class. Additionally,
the required lab time outside of class provides hands-on
experience.
Prerequisite: None

THEA 120 Introduction to Performance 
3 cr
Introduces the fundamentals of stage performance. Improvisation,
relaxation, and character exercises build
awareness of skills necessary for successful live performance.
Presents basic acting vocabulary/theory. Develops
confidence performing in front of others. Includes readings,
plays in context, viewing of live theatre, and short
writing assignments. Fosters more informed observers of
perfomance experience. Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

THEA 200 Introduction to Theatre 
3 cr
Surveys historical development of world theatre emphasizing
western dramatic tradition. Introduces a broad range
of theatrical literature and theory within its historical context.
Includes class discussions and writing assignments,
as well as viewing of live theatre, panel discussions, and
critical response sessions. Course attributes: CCA.
Prerequisite: None

THEA 220 Beginning Acting 
3 cr
Sets foundation for the integrated voice, movement and
acting training sequence. Draws from diverse sources to
develop the actor's instrument and its potential for stage
performance. Beginning with non-verbal exploration and
movement study, students progress to character exercises
with text. Designed to increase body awareness, expand
flexibility and control, reinforce acting vocabulary and
theory, and promote understanding of the demands of
creating dynamic characters for stage performance.
Prerequisite: THEA 120

THEA 230 Stagecraft II: Scene Construction 
3 cr
Provides the student with the basic knowledge of stage
construction. Familiarizes students with the methods,
materials, equipment, concepts and processes involved in
the construction of scenery for the theatre. The emphasis
of this course will be on the physical process that results
in the production of scenery through construction techniques.
Hands-on experience will be gained by completing
lab hours in the scene shop; assisting in the construction
and installation of theatre program season.
Prerequisite: THEA 110

THEA 240 Stagecraft II: Costume Construction 
3 cr
Provides basic knowledge of costume construction. Familiarizes
students with the methods, materials, equipment,
concepts and processes involved in the construction
of costumes for theatre production. Emphasis of this
course will be on the physical process that results in the
production of costumes through construction techniques.
Hands-on experience will be gained by completing lab
hours in the costume shop; assisting in the construction
and installation of theatre program season.
Prerequisite: THEA 110

THEA 250 Fundamentals of Theatre Design 
3 cr
Explores the creative process and the principles and tools
of design as they apply to theatrical production. Emphasis
will be on script analysis, graphic techniques, and
research for and of design. Introduces the student to the
vocabulary, fundamental elements and principles of design
and how they apply to the theatre experience of scenery,
costume and lighting design to include discussion, appreciation
and evaluation of theatrical design.
Prerequisite: None

THEA 271 Play Analysis 
3 cr
Introduces the basic principles, techniques and challenges
of analyzing plays for theatrical production. Focuses on
the process of reading and analyzing plays while developing
basic vocabulary of dramatic styles. Develops basic
knowledge of principles of dramatic structure through
readings from a diverse range of theatre texts from the
western canon. Goal is to discover what the playwright
has dramatized and how best to realize it on stage clearly,
imaginatively and powerfully.
Prerequisite: THEA 200

THEA 370 Collaboration 
3 cr
Develops practical studio in theatrical collaboration
designed for both performance and production students.
Develops skills in collaboration across artistic disciplines,
offering effective strategies for communication as students
create and perform short projects. Offers direct, realworld
experience in theatrical collaboration and leadership,
allowing the individual to test skills talents and
creative ideas in an environment conducive to both individual
and collective artistic growth.
Prerequisite: THEA 200, THEA 250, THEA 271

THEA 372 Theatre Practicum 
1 cr
Provides practical experience on performance and production
related activities for Theatre Program productions
during semester. Students may repeat this course for
credit.
Prerequisite: By audition or interview only

THEA 379 Topics in Theatre Production 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of theatre production.
Designed to provide advanced experience in materials and
techniques used in theatre. Topics are offered on a rotating
basis and focus on a specialized aspect of production
technique. Topics may include: Historical Patterning,
Computer-Aided Drafting, Advanced Lighting Technology,
Stage Management. Students may repeat enrollment
for credit but may not repeat topics.
Prerequisite: THEA 110, THEA 230 or THEA 240

THEA 381 Theatre History I: Beginnings to 17th Century
3 cr
Traces the evolution of Western theatre in its social/political
context from ancient Greece through the Renaissance.
Theatre architecture, styles of staging, and works of
dramatic literature are studied in relation to the social and
intellectual history of each major era.
Prerequisite: THEA 200

THEA 383 Theatre History II: 18th Century to Present 
3 cr
Traces the evolution of Western theatre in its social/political
context from the 18th century to the Post-Modern Period.
Theatre architecture, styles of staging, and works of dramatic
literaure will be studied in relation to the social and intellectual
history of each major era or artist style.
Prerequisite: THEA 200

THEA 470 Directing 
3 cr
Explores the fundamentals of direction for the stage, including
analysis, composition and staging. Begins with play analysis
from a director's point of view, followed by exploration of
stage composition, then progresses to staging and working
with actors. The various exercises culminate in the direction
of a short play for public performance. The goal is to increase
understanding of the many roles and responsibilities required
of the theatre director as artist and collaborator.
Prerequisite: THEA 120, THEA 200, THEA 271, THEA 250, THEA 370

THEA 479 Topics in Theatre Performance 
3 cr
Studies in depth a specific aspect of theatre performance. Provides
advanced work in analysis, interpretation and research.
Primarily for majors in their junior or senior year. Includes
topics such as: Accents and Dialects for the Stage, Advanced
Directing, Clowning and Comedian, Collaborative Theatre
Ensemble, Contact Improvisation, Hip Hop Theatre, Improvisation,
Mask Performance, Melodrama, Period Dance for
Stage, Physical Comedy, Puppetry, Spoken Word, and Stage
Combat.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

TRVL 300 Travel Course To: 
3 cr
Offers students opportunity to take learning beyond the
classroom. These courses involve on-campus instruction
and meetings combined with travel to another country/
region. Each course is designed to acquaint students with
the history, geography, culture and society of other counties/regions.
The specific travel course will identify the
country/region under study, with a syllabus outlining the
travel and course requirements.
Prerequisite: Instructor approval

WMST 201 Introduction to Women's Studies 
3 cr
Examines the ways in which gender is socially, historically
and culturally constructed. Focuses on the impact of
feminism from past to present. Explores political, scholarly
and interdisciplinary approaches to feminism. Students
will be encouraged to develop their own ideas about
how feminism can transform self, community and society.
Course attributes: CSS, WMST.
Prerequisite: None

WMST 202 Feminist Theory 
3 cr
Analyzes and evaluates historical and contemporary
feminist works tracing the origins of feminist theories
within the AngloAmerican and French contexts, as well as
examining the theoretical bases of international women's
movements. Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: WMST 201

WMST 310 Women's Studies Service Seminar 
3 cr
Begins with an overview of the major theories of feminist
thought: liberal, socialist, Marxist, radical, ecological
feminisms and womanism. It also explores some of the
feminisms from Third World countries. This overview
will provide the foundation and analytical framework
which students will bring to their self-selected service
projects, to better understand and evaluate the work world
and women's struggles and accomplishments therein.
Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: WMST 201 and two WMST electives

WMST 395 Special Topics in Women's Studies 
3 cr
Examines in depth a specific topic area in women's studies.
Provides advanced work in women's studies literature,
theory and/or research in a topic area. Primarily for students
in the women's studies minor. Content identified by
subtitle. Course attributes: WMST.
Prerequisite: WMST 201 Course Attribute Key: 